1
High atop the steps of the Pyramid of Giza a young woman laughed and called down to him.
“Robert, hurry up! I knew I should have married a younger man!” Her smile was magic.
He struggled to keep up, but his legs felt like stone. “Wait,” he begged. “Please…”
As he climbed, his vision began to blur. There was a thundering in his ears. I must reach her!
But when he looked up again, the woman had disappeared. In her place stood an old man with
rotting teeth. The man stared down, curling his lips into a lonely grimace. Then he let out a scream
of anguish that resounded across the desert.
Robert Langdon awoke with a start from his nightmare. The phone beside his bed was
ringing. Dazed, he picked up the receiver.
“Hello?”
“I’m looking for Robert Langdon,” a man’s voice said.
Langdon sat up in his empty bed and tried to clear his mind. “This… is Robert Langdon.” He
squinted at his digital clock. It was 5:18 A.M.
“I must see you immediately.”
“Who is this?”
“My name is Maximilian Kohler. I’m a discrete particle physicist.”
“A what ?” Langdon could barely focus. “Are you sure you’ve got the right Langdon?”
“You’re a professor of religious iconology at Harvard University. You’ve written three books
on symbology and–”
“Do you know what time it is?”
“I apologize. I have something you need to see. I can’t discuss it on the phone.”
A knowing groan escaped Langdon’s lips. This had happened before. One of the perils of
writing books about religious symbology was the calls from religious zealots who wanted him to
confirm their latest sign from God. Last month a stripper from Oklahoma had promised Langdon
the best sex of his life if he would fly down and verify the authenticity of a cruciform that had
magically appeared on her bed sheets. The Shroud of Tulsa , Langdon had called it.
“How did you get my number?” Langdon tried to be polite, despite the hour.
“On the Worldwide Web. The site for your book.”
Langdon frowned. He was damn sure his book’s site did not include his home phone number.
The man was obviously lying.
“I need to see you,” the caller insisted. “I’ll pay you well.”
Now Langdon was getting mad. “I’m sorry, but I really–”
“If you leave immediately, you can be here by–”
“I’m not going anywhere! It’s five o’clock in the morning!” Langdon hung up and collapsed
back in bed. He closed his eyes and tried to fall back asleep. It was no use. The dream was
emblazoned in his mind. Reluctantly, he put on his robe and went downstairs.
Robert Langdon wandered barefoot through his deserted Massachusetts Victorian home and
nursed his ritual insomnia remedy–a mug of steaming Nestlé’s Quik. The April moon filtered
through the bay windows and played on the oriental carpets. Langdon’s colleagues often joked that
his place looked more like an anthropology museum than a home. His shelves were packed with
religious artifacts from around the world–an ekuaba from Ghana, a gold cross from Spain, a
cycladic idol from the Aegean, and even a rare woven boccus from Borneo, a young warrior’s
symbol of perpetual youth.
As Langdon sat on his brass Maharishi’s chest and savored the warmth of the chocolate, the
bay window caught his reflection. The image was distorted and pale… like a ghost. An aging ghost ,
he thought, cruelly reminded that his youthful spirit was living in a mortal shell.
Although not overly handsome in a classical sense, the forty-five-year-old Langdon had what
his female colleagues referred to as an “erudite” appeal–wisps of gray in his thick brown hair,
probing blue eyes, an arrestingly deep voice, and the strong, carefree smile of a collegiate athlete. A
varsity diver in prep school and college, Langdon still had the body of a swimmer, a toned, six-foot
physique that he vigilantly maintained with fifty laps a day in the university pool.
Langdon’s friends had always viewed him as a bit of an enigma–a man caught between
centuries. On weekends he could be seen lounging on the quad in blue jeans, discussing computer
graphics or religious history with students; other times he could be spotted in his Harris tweed and
paisley vest, photographed in the pages of upscale art magazines at museum openings where he had
been asked to lecture.
Although a tough teacher and strict disciplinarian, Langdon was the first to embrace what he
hailed as the “lost art of good clean fun.” He relished recreation with an infectious fanaticism that
had earned him a fraternal acceptance among his students. His campus nickname–“The
Dolphin”–was a reference both to his affable nature and his legendary ability to dive into a pool and
outmaneuver the entire opposing squad in a water polo match.
As Langdon sat alone, absently gazing into the darkness, the silence of his home was
shattered again, this time by the ring of his fax machine. Too exhausted to be annoyed, Langdon
forced a tired chuckle.
God’s people , he thought. Two thousand years of waiting for their Messiah, and they’re still
persistent as hell .
Wearily, he returned his empty mug to the kitchen and walked slowly to his oak-paneled
study. The incoming fax lay in the tray. Sighing, he scooped up the paper and looked at it.
Instantly, a wave of nausea hit him.
The image on the page was that of a human corpse. The body had been stripped naked, and its
head had been twisted, facing completely backward. On the victim’s chest was a terrible burn. The
man had been branded… imprinted with a single word. It was a word Langdon knew well. Very
well. He stared at the ornate lettering in disbelief.
“Illuminati,” he stammered, his heart pounding. It can’t be …
In slow motion, afraid of what he was about to witness, Langdon rotated the fax 180 degrees.
He looked at the word upside down.
Instantly, the breath went out of him. It was like he had been hit by a truck. Barely able to
believe his eyes, he rotated the fax again, reading the brand right-side up and then upside down.
“Illuminati,” he whispered.
Stunned, Langdon collapsed in a chair. He sat a moment in utter bewilderment. Gradually, his
eyes were drawn to the blinking red light on his fax machine. Whoever had sent this fax was still on
the line… waiting to talk. Langdon gazed at the blinking light a long time.
Then, trembling, he picked up the receiver.
2
“Do I have your attention now?” the man’s voice said when Langdon finally answered the
line.
“Yes, sir, you damn well do. You want to explain yourself?”
“I tried to tell you before.” The voice was rigid, mechanical. “I’m a physicist. I run a research
facility. We’ve had a murder. You saw the body.”
“How did you find me?” Langdon could barely focus. His mind was racing from the image on
the fax.
“I already told you. The Worldwide Web. The site for your book, The Art of the Illuminati .”
Langdon tried to gather his thoughts. His book was virtually unknown in mainstream literary
circles, but it had developed quite a following on-line. Nonetheless, the caller’s claim still made no
sense. “That page has no contact information,” Langdon challenged. “I’m certain of it.”
“I have people here at the lab very adept at extracting user information from the Web.”
Langdon was skeptical. “Sounds like your lab knows a lot about the Web.”
“We should,” the man fired back. “We invented it.”
Something in the man’s voice told Langdon he was not joking.
“I must see you,” the caller insisted. “This is not a matter we can discuss on the phone. My
lab is only an hour’s flight from Boston.”
Langdon stood in the dim light of his study and analyzed the fax in his hand. The image was
overpowering, possibly representing the epigraphical find of the century, a decade of his research
confirmed in a single symbol.
“It’s urgent,” the voice pressured.
Langdon’s eyes were locked on the brand. Illuminati , he read over and over. His work had
always been based on the symbolic equivalent of fossils–ancient documents and historical
hearsay–but this image before him was today. Present tense. He felt like a paleontologist coming
face to face with a living dinosaur.
“I’ve taken the liberty of sending a plane for you,” the voice said. “It will be in Boston in
twenty minutes.”
Langdon felt his mouth go dry. An hour’s flight …
“Please forgive my presumption,” the voice said. “I need you here.”
Langdon looked again at the fax–an ancient myth confirmed in black and white. The
implications were frightening. He gazed absently through the bay window. The first hint of dawn
was sifting through the birch trees in his backyard, but the view looked somehow different this
morning. As an odd combination of fear and exhilaration settled over him, Langdon knew he had no
choice.
“You win,” he said. “Tell me where to meet the plane.”
3
Thousands of miles away, two men were meeting. The chamber was dark. Medieval. Stone.
“Benvenuto ,” the man in charge said. He was seated in the shadows, out of sight. “Were you
successful?”
“Si ,” the dark figure replied. “Perfectamente .” His words were as hard as the rock walls.
“And there will be no doubt who is responsible?”
“None.”
“Superb. Do you have what I asked for?”
The killer’s eyes glistened, black like oil. He produced a heavy electronic device and set it on
the table.
The man in the shadows seemed pleased. “You have done well.”
“Serving the brotherhood is an honor,” the killer said.
“Phase two begins shortly. Get some rest. Tonight we change the world.”
4
Robert Langdon’s Saab 900S tore out of the Callahan Tunnel and emerged on the east side of
Boston Harbor near the entrance to Logan Airport. Checking his directions Langdon found Aviation
Road and turned left past the old Eastern Airlines Building. Three hundred yards down the access
road a hangar loomed in the darkness. A large number 4 was painted on it. He pulled into the
parking lot and got out of his car.
A round-faced man in a blue flight suit emerged from behind the building. “Robert
Langdon?” he called. The man’s voice was friendly. He had an accent Langdon couldn’t place.
“That’s me,” Langdon said, locking his car.
“Perfect timing,” the man said. “I’ve just landed. Follow me, please.”
As they circled the building, Langdon felt tense. He was not accustomed to cryptic phone
calls and secret rendezvous with strangers. Not knowing what to expect he had donned his usual
classroom attire–a pair of chinos, a turtleneck, and a Harris tweed suit jacket. As they walked, he
thought about the fax in his jacket pocket, still unable to believe the image it depicted.
The pilot seemed to sense Langdon’s anxiety. “Flying’s not a problem for you, is it, sir?”
“Not at all,” Langdon replied. Branded corpses are a problem for me. Flying I can handle .
The man led Langdon the length of the hangar. They rounded the corner onto the runway.
Langdon stopped dead in his tracks and gaped at the aircraft parked on the tarmac. “We’re
riding in that ?”
The man grinned. “Like it?”
Langdon stared a long moment. “Like it? What the hell is it?”
The craft before them was enormous. It was vaguely reminiscent of the space shuttle except
that the top had been shaved off, leaving it perfectly flat. Parked there on the runway, it resembled a
colossal wedge. Langdon’s first impression was that he must be dreaming. The vehicle looked as
airworthy as a Buick. The wings were practically nonexistent–just two stubby fins on the rear of the
fuselage. A pair of dorsal guiders rose out of the aft section. The rest of the plane was hull–about
200 feet from front to back–no windows, nothing but hull.
“Two hundred fifty thousand kilos fully fueled,” the pilot offered, like a father bragging about
his newborn. “Runs on slush hydrogen. The shell’s a titanium matrix with silicon carbide fibers.
She packs a 20:1 thrust/weight ratio; most jets run at 7:1. The director must be in one helluva a
hurry to see you. He doesn’t usually send the big boy.”
“This thing flies ?” Langdon said.
The pilot smiled. “Oh yeah.” He led Langdon across the tarmac toward the plane. “Looks
kind of startling, I know, but you better get used to it. In five years, all you’ll see are these
babies–HSCT’s–High Speed Civil Transports. Our lab’s one of the first to own one.”
Must be one hell of a lab , Langdon thought.
“This one’s a prototype of the Boeing X-33,” the pilot continued, “but there are dozens of
others–the National Aero Space Plane, the Russians have Scramjet, the Brits have HOTOL. The
future’s here, it’s just taking some time to get to the public sector. You can kiss conventional jets
good-bye.”
Langdon looked up warily at the craft. “I think I’d prefer a conventional jet.”
The pilot motioned up the gangplank. “This way, please, Mr. Langdon. Watch your step.”
Minutes later, Langdon was seated inside the empty cabin. The pilot buckled him into the
front row and disappeared toward the front of the aircraft.
The cabin itself looked surprisingly like a wide-body commercial airliner. The only exception
was that it had no windows, which made Langdon uneasy. He had been haunted his whole life by a
mild case of claustrophobia–the vestige of a childhood incident he had never quite overcome.
Langdon’s aversion to closed spaces was by no means debilitating, but it had always
frustrated him. It manifested itself in subtle ways. He avoided enclosed sports like racquetball or
squash, and he had gladly paid a small fortune for his airy, high-ceilinged Victorian home even
though economical faculty housing was readily available. Langdon had often suspected his
attraction to the art world as a young boy sprang from his love of museums’ wide open spaces.
The engines roared to life beneath him, sending a deep shudder through the hull. Langdon
swallowed hard and waited. He felt the plane start taxiing. Piped-in country music began playing
quietly overhead.
A phone on the wall beside him beeped twice. Langdon lifted the receiver.
“Hello?”
“Comfortable, Mr. Langdon?”
“Not at all.”
“Just relax. We’ll be there in an hour.”
“And where exactly is there ?” Langdon asked, realizing he had no idea where he was headed.
“Geneva,” the pilot replied, revving the engines. “The lab’s in Geneva.”
“Geneva,” Langdon repeated, feeling a little better. “Upstate New York. I’ve actually got
family near Seneca Lake. I wasn’t aware Geneva had a physics lab.”
The pilot laughed. “Not Geneva, New York , Mr. Langdon. Geneva, Switzerland .”
The word took a long moment to register. “Switzerland?” Langdon felt his pulse surge. “I
thought you said the lab was only an hour away!”
“It is, Mr. Langdon.” The pilot chuckled. “This plane goes Mach fifteen.”
5
On a busy European street, the killer serpentined through a crowd. He was a powerful man.
Dark and potent. Deceptively agile. His muscles still felt hard from the thrill of his meeting.
It went well , he told himself. Although his employer had never revealed his face, the killer
felt honored to be in his presence. Had it really been only fifteen days since his employer had first
made contact? The killer still remembered every word of that call…
“My name is Janus,” the caller had said. “We are kinsmen of a sort. We share an enemy. I
hear your skills are for hire.”
“It depends whom you represent,” the killer replied.
The caller told him.
“Is this your idea of a joke?”
“You have heard our name, I see,” the caller replied.
“Of course. The brotherhood is legendary.”
“And yet you find yourself doubting I am genuine.”
“Everyone knows the brothers have faded to dust.”
“A devious ploy. The most dangerous enemy is that which no one fears.”
The killer was skeptical. “The brotherhood endures?”
“Deeper underground than ever before. Our roots infiltrate everything you see… even the
sacred fortress of our most sworn enemy.”
“Impossible. They are invulnerable.”
“Our reach is far.”
“No one’s reach is that far.”
“Very soon, you will believe. An irrefutable demonstration of the brotherhood’s power has
already transpired. A single act of treachery and proof.”
“What have you done?”
The caller told him.
The killer’s eyes went wide. “An impossible task.”
The next day, newspapers around the globe carried the same headline. The killer became a
believer.
Now, fifteen days later, the killer’s faith had solidified beyond the shadow of a doubt. The
brotherhood endures , he thought. Tonight they will surface to reveal their power .
As he made his way through the streets, his black eyes gleamed with foreboding. One of the
most covert and feared fraternities ever to walk the earth had called on him for service. They have
chosen wisely , he thought. His reputation for secrecy was exceeded only by that of his deadliness.
So far, he had served them nobly. He had made his kill and delivered the item to Janus as
requested. Now, it was up to Janus to use his power to ensure the item’s placement.
The placement…
The killer wondered how Janus could possibly handle such a staggering task. The man
obviously had connections on the inside. The brotherhood’s dominion seemed limitless.
Janus , the killer thought. A code name, obviously . Was it a reference, he wondered, to the
Roman two-faced god… or to the moon of Saturn? Not that it made any difference. Janus wielded
unfathomable power. He had proven that beyond a doubt.
As the killer walked, he imagined his ancestors smiling down on him. Today he was fighting
their battle, he was fighting the same enemy they had fought for ages, as far back as the eleventh
century… when the enemy’s crusading armies had first pillaged his land, raping and killing his
people, declaring them unclean, defiling their temples and gods.
His ancestors had formed a small but deadly army to defend themselves. The army became
famous across the land as protectors–skilled executioners who wandered the countryside
slaughtering any of the enemy they could find. They were renowned not only for their brutal
killings, but also for celebrating their slayings by plunging themselves into drug-induced stupors.
Their drug of choice was a potent intoxicant they called hashish .
As their notoriety spread, these lethal men became known by a single word–Hassassin
–literally “the followers of hashish.” The name Hassassin became synonymous with death in
almost every language on earth. The word was still used today, even in modern English… but like
the craft of killing, the word had evolved.
It was now pronounced assassin .
6
Sixty-four minutes had passed when an incredulous and slightly air-sick Robert Langdon
stepped down the gangplank onto the sun-drenched runway. A crisp breeze rustled the lapels of his
tweed jacket. The open space felt wonderful. He squinted out at the lush green valley rising to
snowcapped peaks all around them.
I’m dreaming , he told himself. Any minute now I’ll be waking up .
“Welcome to Switzerland,” the pilot said, yelling over the roar of the X-33’s misted-fuel
HEDM engines winding down behind them.
Langdon checked his watch. It read 7:07 A.M.
“You just crossed six time zones,” the pilot offered. “It’s a little past 1 P.M. here.”
Langdon reset his watch.
“How do you feel?”
He rubbed his stomach. “Like I’ve been eating Styrofoam.”
The pilot nodded. “Altitude sickness. We were at sixty thousand feet. You’re thirty percent
lighter up there. Lucky we only did a puddle jump. If we’d gone to Tokyo I’d have taken her all the
way up–a hundred miles. Now that’ll get your insides rolling.”
Langdon gave a wan nod and counted himself lucky. All things considered, the flight had
been remarkably ordinary. Aside from a bone-crushing acceleration during take off, the plane’s
motion had been fairly typical–occasional minor turbulence, a few pressure changes as they’d
climbed, but nothing at all to suggest they had been hurtling through space at the mind-numbing
speed of 11,000 miles per hour.
A handful of technicians scurried onto the runway to tend to the X-33. The pilot escorted
Langdon to a black Peugeot sedan in a parking area beside the control tower. Moments later they
were speeding down a paved road that stretched out across the valley floor. A faint cluster of
buildings rose in the distance. Outside, the grassy plains tore by in a blur.
Langdon watched in disbelief as the pilot pushed the speedometer up around 170 kilometers
an hour–over 100 miles per hour. What is it with this guy and speed? he wondered.
“Five kilometers to the lab,” the pilot said. “I’ll have you there in two minutes.”
Langdon searched in vain for a seat belt. Why not make it three and get us there alive?
The car raced on.
“Do you like Reba?” the pilot asked, jamming a cassette into the tape deck.
A woman started singing.
It’s just the fear of being alone…
No fear here , Langdon thought absently. His female colleagues often ribbed him that his
collection of museum-quality artifacts was nothing more than a transparent attempt to fill an empty
home, a home they insisted would benefit greatly from the presence of a woman. Langdon always
laughed it off, reminding them he already had three loves in his life–symbology, water polo, and
bachelorhood–the latter being a freedom that enabled him to travel the world, sleep as late as he
wanted, and enjoy quiet nights at home with a brandy and a good book.
“We’re like a small city,” the pilot said, pulling Langdon from his daydream. “Not just labs.
We’ve got supermarkets, a hospital, even a cinema.”
Langdon nodded blankly and looked out at the sprawling expanse of buildings rising before
them.
“In fact,” the pilot added, “we possess the largest machine on earth.”
“Really?” Langdon scanned the countryside.
“You won’t see it out there, sir.” The pilot smiled. “It’s buried six stories below the earth.”
Langdon didn’t have time to ask. Without warning the pilot jammed on the brakes. The car
skidded to a stop outside a reinforced sentry booth.
Langdon read the sign before them.
Securite. Arretez
He suddenly felt a wave of panic, realizing where he was. “My God! I didn’t bring my
passport!”
“Passports are unnecessary,” the driver assured. “We have a standing arrangement with the
Swiss government.”
Langdon watched dumbfounded as his driver gave the guard an ID. The sentry ran it through
an electronic authentication device. The machine flashed green.
“Passenger name?”
“Robert Langdon,” the driver replied.
“Guest of?”
“The director.”
The sentry arched his eyebrows. He turned and checked a computer printout, verifying it
against the data on his computer screen. Then he returned to the window. “Enjoy your stay, Mr.
Langdon.”
The car shot off again, accelerating another 200 yards around a sweeping rotary that led to the
facility’s main entrance. Looming before them was a rectangular, ultramodern structure of glass and
steel. Langdon was amazed by the building’s striking transparent design. He had always had a fond
love of architecture.
“The Glass Cathedral,” the escort offered.
“A church?”
“Hell, no. A church is the one thing we don’t have. Physics is the religion around here. Use
the Lord’s name in vain all you like,” he laughed, “just don’t slander any quarks or mesons.”
Langdon sat bewildered as the driver swung the car around and brought it to a stop in front of
the glass building. Quarks and mesons? No border control? Mach 15 jets? Who the hell are these
guys? The engraved granite slab in front of the building bore the answer:
CERN
Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire
“Nuclear Research?” Langdon asked, fairly certain his translation was correct.
The driver did not answer. He was leaning forward, busily adjusting the car’s cassette player.
“This is your stop. The director will meet you at this entrance.”
Langdon noted a man in a wheelchair exiting the building. He looked to be in his early sixties.
Gaunt and totally bald with a sternly set jaw, he wore a white lab coat and dress shoes propped
firmly on the wheelchair’s footrest. Even at a distance his eyes looked lifeless–like two gray stones.
“Is that him?” Langdon asked.
The driver looked up. “Well, I’ll be.” He turned and gave Langdon an ominous smile. “Speak
of the devil.”
Uncertain what to expect, Langdon stepped from the vehicle.
The man in the wheelchair accelerated toward Langdon and offered a clammy hand. “Mr.
Langdon? We spoke on the phone. My name is Maximilian Kohler.”
7
Maximilian Kohler, director general of CERN, was known behind his back as König –King. It
was a title more of fear than reverence for the figure who ruled over his dominion from a
wheelchair throne. Although few knew him personally, the horrific story of how he had been
crippled was lore at CERN, and there were few there who blamed him for his bitterness… nor for
his sworn dedication to pure science.
Langdon had only been in Kohler’s presence a few moments and already sensed the director
was a man who kept his distance. Langdon found himself practically jogging to keep up with
Kohler’s electric wheelchair as it sped silently toward the main entrance. The wheelchair was like
none Langdon had ever seen–equipped with a bank of electronics including a multiline phone, a
paging system, computer screen, even a small, detachable video camera. King Kohler’s mobile
command center.
Langdon followed through a mechanical door into CERN’s voluminous main lobby.
The Glass Cathedral , Langdon mused, gazing upward toward heaven.
Overhead, the bluish glass roof shimmered in the afternoon sun, casting rays of geometric
patterns in the air and giving the room a sense of grandeur. Angular shadows fell like veins across
the white tiled walls and down to the marble floors. The air smelled clean, sterile. A handful of
scientists moved briskly about, their footsteps echoing in the resonant space.
“This way, please, Mr. Langdon.” His voice sounded almost computerized. His accent was
rigid and precise, like his stern features. Kohler coughed and wiped his mouth on a white
handkerchief as he fixed his dead gray eyes on Langdon. “Please hurry.” His wheelchair seemed to
leap across the tiled floor.
Langdon followed past what seemed to be countless hallways branching off the main atrium.
Every hallway was alive with activity. The scientists who saw Kohler seemed to stare in surprise,
eyeing Langdon as if wondering who he must be to command such company.
“I’m embarrassed to admit,” Langdon ventured, trying to make conversation, “that I’ve never
heard of CERN.”
“Not surprising,” Kohler replied, his clipped response sounding harshly efficient. “Most
Americans do not see Europe as the world leader in scientific research. They see us as nothing but a
quaint shopping district–an odd perception if you consider the nationalities of men like Einstein,
Galileo, and Newton.”
Langdon was unsure how to respond. He pulled the fax from his pocket. “This man in the
photograph, can you–”
Kohler cut him off with a wave of his hand. “Please. Not here. I am taking you to him now.”
He held out his hand. “Perhaps I should take that.”
Langdon handed over the fax and fell silently into step.
Kohler took a sharp left and entered a wide hallway adorned with awards and commendations.
A particularly large plaque dominated the entry. Langdon slowed to read the engraved bronze as
they passed.
ARS ELECTRONICA AWARD
For Cultural Innovation in the Digital Age
Awarded to Tim Berners Lee and CERN
for the invention of the
WORLDWIDE WEB
Well I’ll be damned , Langdon thought, reading the text. This guy wasn’t kidding . Langdon
had always thought of the Web as an American invention. Then again, his knowledge was limited to
the site for his own book and the occasional on-line exploration of the Louvre or El Prado on his old
Macintosh.
“The Web,” Kohler said, coughing again and wiping his mouth, “began here as a network of
in-house computer sites. It enabled scientists from different departments to share daily findings with
one another. Of course, the entire world is under the impression the Web is U.S. technology.”
Langdon followed down the hall. “Why not set the record straight?”
Kohler shrugged, apparently disinterested. “A petty misconception over a petty technology.
CERN is far greater than a global connection of computers. Our scientists produce miracles almost
daily.”
Langdon gave Kohler a questioning look. “Miracles?” The word “miracle” was certainly not
part of the vocabulary around Harvard’s Fairchild Science Building. Miracles were left for the
School of Divinity.
“You sound skeptical,” Kohler said. “I thought you were a religious symbologist. Do you not
believe in miracles?”
“I’m undecided on miracles,” Langdon said. Particularly those that take place in science labs
.
“Perhaps miracle is the wrong word. I was simply trying to speak your language.”
“My language?” Langdon was suddenly uncomfortable. “Not to disappoint you, sir, but I
study religious symbology –I’m an academic, not a priest.”
Kohler slowed suddenly and turned, his gaze softening a bit. “Of course. How simple of me.
One does not need to have cancer to analyze its symptoms.”
Langdon had never heard it put quite that way.
As they moved down the hallway, Kohler gave an accepting nod. “I suspect you and I will
understand each other perfectly, Mr. Langdon.”
Somehow Langdon doubted it.
As the pair hurried on, Langdon began to sense a deep rumbling up ahead. The noise got more
and more pronounced with every step, reverberating through the walls. It seemed to be coming from
the end of the hallway in front of them.
“What’s that?” Langdon finally asked, having to yell. He felt like they were approaching an
active volcano.
“Free Fall Tube,” Kohler replied, his hollow voice cutting the air effortlessly. He offered no
other explanation.
Langdon didn’t ask. He was exhausted, and Maximilian Kohler seemed disinterested in
winning any hospitality awards. Langdon reminded himself why he was here. Illuminati . He
assumed somewhere in this colossal facility was a body… a body branded with a symbol he had
just flown 3,000 miles to see.
As they approached the end of the hall, the rumble became almost deafening, vibrating up
through Langdon’s soles. They rounded the bend, and a viewing gallery appeared on the right. Four
thick-paned portals were embedded in a curved wall, like windows in a submarine. Langdon
stopped and looked through one of the holes.
Professor Robert Langdon had seen some strange things in his life, but this was the strangest.
He blinked a few times, wondering if he was hallucinating. He was staring into an enormous
circular chamber. Inside the chamber, floating as though weightless, were people . Three of them.
One waved and did a somersault in midair.
My God , he thought. I’m in the land of Oz .
The floor of the room was a mesh grid, like a giant sheet of chicken wire. Visible beneath the
grid was the metallic blur of a huge propeller.
“Free fall tube,” Kohler said, stopping to wait for him. “Indoor skydiving. For stress relief.
It’s a vertical wind tunnel.”
Langdon looked on in amazement. One of the free fallers, an obese woman, maneuvered
toward the window. She was being buffeted by the air currents but grinned and flashed Langdon the
thumbs-up sign. Langdon smiled weakly and returned the gesture, wondering if she knew it was the
ancient phallic symbol for masculine virility.
The heavyset woman, Langdon noticed, was the only one wearing what appeared to be a
miniature parachute. The swathe of fabric billowed over her like a toy. “What’s her little chute for?”
Langdon asked Kohler. “It can’t be more than a yard in diameter.”
“Friction,” Kohler said. “Decreases her aerodynamics so the fan can lift her.” He started down
the the corridor again. “One square yard of drag will slow a falling body almost twenty percent.”
Langdon nodded blankly.
He never suspected that later that night, in a country hundreds of miles away, the information
would save his life.
8
When Kohler and Langdon emerged from the rear of CERN’s main complex into the stark
Swiss sunlight, Langdon felt as if he’d been transported home. The scene before him looked like an
Ivy League campus.
A grassy slope cascaded downward onto an expansive lowlands where clusters of sugar
maples dotted quadrangles bordered by brick dormitories and footpaths. Scholarly looking
individuals with stacks of books hustled in and out of buildings. As if to accentuate the collegiate
atmosphere, two longhaired hippies hurled a Frisbee back and forth while enjoying Mahler’s Fourth
Symphony blaring from a dorm window.
“These are our residential dorms,” Kohler explained as he accelerated his wheelchair down
the path toward the buildings. “We have over three thousand physicists here. CERN
single-handedly employs more than half of the world’s particle physicists–the brightest minds on
earth–Germans, Japanese, Italians, Dutch, you name it. Our physicists represent over five hundred
universities and sixty nationalities.”
Langdon was amazed. “How do they all communicate?”
“English, of course. The universal language of science.”
Langdon had always heard math was the universal language of science, but he was too tired
to argue. He dutifully followed Kohler down the path.
Halfway to the bottom, a young man jogged by. His T-shirt proclaimed the message: NO
GUT, NO GLORY!
Langdon looked after him, mystified. “Gut?”
“General Unified Theory.” Kohler quipped. “The theory of everything.”
“I see,” Langdon said, not seeing at all.
“Are you familiar with particle physics, Mr. Langdon?”
Langdon shrugged. “I’m familiar with general physics–falling bodies, that sort of thing.” His
years of high-diving experience had given him a profound respect for the awesome power of
gravitational acceleration. “Particle physics is the study of atoms, isn’t it?”
Kohler shook his head. “Atoms look like planets compared to what we deal with. Our
interests lie with an atom’s nucleus –a mere ten-thousandth the size of the whole.” He coughed
again, sounding sick. “The men and women of CERN are here to find answers to the same
questions man has been asking since the beginning of time. Where did we come from? What are we
made of?”
“And these answers are in a physics lab?”
“You sound surprised.”
“I am. The questions seem spiritual.”
“Mr. Langdon, all questions were once spiritual. Since the beginning of time, spirituality and
religion have been called on to fill in the gaps that science did not understand. The rising and setting
of the sun was once attributed to Helios and a flaming chariot. Earthquakes and tidal waves were
the wrath of Poseidon. Science has now proven those gods to be false idols. Soon all Gods will be
proven to be false idols. Science has now provided answers to almost every question man can ask.
There are only a few questions left, and they are the esoteric ones. Where do we come from? What
are we doing here? What is the meaning of life and the universe?”
Langdon was amazed. “And these are questions CERN is trying to answer?”
“Correction. These are questions we are answering.”
Langdon fell silent as the two men wound through the residential quadrangles. As they
walked, a Frisbee sailed overhead and skidded to a stop directly in front of them. Kohler ignored it
and kept going.
A voice called out from across the quad. “S’il vous pla?t! ”
Langdon looked over. An elderly white-haired man in a College Paris sweatshirt waved to
him. Langdon picked up the Frisbee and expertly threw it back. The old man caught it on one finger
and bounced it a few times before whipping it over his shoulder to his partner. “Merci!” he called
to Langdon.
“Congratulations,” Kohler said when Langdon finally caught up. “You just played toss with a
Noble prize-winner, Georges Charpak, inventor of the multiwire proportional chamber.”
Langdon nodded. My lucky day .
It took Langdon and Kohler three more minutes to reach their destination–a large, well-kept
dormitory sitting in a grove of aspens. Compared to the other dorms, this structure seemed
luxurious. The carved stone sign in front read Building C .
Imaginative title , Langdon thought.
But despite its sterile name, Building C appealed to Langdon’s sense of architectural
style–conservative and solid. It had a red brick facade, an ornate balustrade, and sat framed by
sculpted symmetrical hedges. As the two men ascended the stone path toward the entry, they passed
under a gateway formed by a pair of marble columns. Someone had put a sticky-note on one of
them.
This column is Ionic
Physicist graffiti? Langdon mused, eyeing the column and chuckling to himself. “I’m
relieved to see that even brilliant physicists make mistakes.”
Kohler looked over. “What do you mean?”
“Whoever wrote that note made a mistake. That column isn’t Ionic. Ionic columns are
uniform in width. That one’s tapered. It’s Doric–the Greek counterpart. A common mistake.”
Kohler did not smile. “The author meant it as a joke, Mr. Langdon. Ionic means containing
ions–electrically charged particles. Most objects contain them.”
Langdon looked back at the column and groaned.
Langdon was still feeling stupid when he stepped from the elevator on the top floor of
Building C. He followed Kohler down a well-appointed corridor. The decor was
unexpected–traditional colonial French–a cherry divan, porcelain floor vase, and scrolled
woodwork.
“We like to keep our tenured scientists comfortable,” Kohler explained.
Evidently , Langdon thought. “So the man in the fax lived up here? One of your upper-level
employees?”
“Quite,” Kohler said. “He missed a meeting with me this morning and did not answer his
page. I came up here to locate him and found him dead in his living room.”
Langdon felt a sudden chill realizing that he was about to see a dead body. His stomach had
never been particularly stalwart. It was a weakness he’d discovered as an art student when the
teacher informed the class that Leonardo da Vinci had gained his expertise in the human form by
exhuming corpses and dissecting their musculature.
Kohler led the way to the far end of the hallway. There was a single door. “The Penthouse , as
you would say,” Kohler announced, dabbing a bead of perspiration from his forehead.
Langdon eyed the lone oak door before them. The name plate read:
Leonardo Vetra
“Leonardo Vetra,” Kohler said, “would have been fifty-eight next week. He was one of the
most brilliant scientists of our time. His death is a profound loss for science.”
For an instant Langdon thought he sensed emotion in Kohler’s hardened face. But as quickly
as it had come, it was gone. Kohler reached in his pocket and began sifting through a large key ring.
An odd thought suddenly occurred to Langdon. The building seemed deserted. “Where is
everyone?” he asked. The lack of activity was hardly what he expected considering they were about
to enter a murder scene.
“The residents are in their labs,” Kohler replied, finding the key.
“I mean the police ,” Langdon clarified. “Have they left already?”
Kohler paused, his key halfway into the lock. “Police?”
Langdon’s eyes met the director’s. “Police. You sent me a fax of a homicide. You must have
called the police.”
“I most certainly have not.”
“What?”
Kohler’s gray eyes sharpened. “The situation is complex, Mr. Langdon.”
Langdon felt a wave of apprehension. “But… certainly someone else knows about this!”
“Yes. Leonardo’s adopted daughter. She is also a physicist here at CERN. She and her father
share a lab. They are partners. Ms. Vetra has been away this week doing field research. I have
notified her of her father’s death, and she is returning as we speak.”
“But a man has been murd–”
“A formal investigation,” Kohler said, his voice firm, “will take place. However, it will most
certainly involve a search of Vetra’s lab, a space he and his daughter hold most private. Therefore,
it will wait until Ms. Vetra has arrived. I feel I owe her at least that modicum of discretion.”
Kohler turned the key.
As the door swung open, a blast of icy air hissed into the hall and hit Langdon in the face. He
fell back in bewilderment. He was gazing across the threshold of an alien world. The flat before him
was immersed in a thick, white fog. The mist swirled in smoky vortexes around the furniture and
shrouded the room in opaque haze.
“What the…?” Langdon stammered.
“Freon cooling system,” Kohler replied. “I chilled the flat to preserve the body.”
Langdon buttoned his tweed jacket against the cold. I’m in Oz , he thought. And I forgot my
magic slippers .
9
The corpse on the floor before Langdon was hideous. The late Leonardo Vetra lay on his
back, stripped naked, his skin bluish-gray. His neck bones were jutting out where they had been
broken, and his head was twisted completely backward, pointing the wrong way. His face was out
of view, pressed against the floor. The man lay in a frozen puddle of his own urine, the hair around
his shriveled genitals spidered with frost.
Fighting a wave of nausea, Langdon let his eyes fall to the victim’s chest. Although Langdon
had stared at the symmetrical wound a dozen times on the fax, the burn was infinitely more
commanding in real life. The raised, broiled flesh was perfectly delineated… the symbol flawlessly
formed.
Langdon wondered if the intense chill now raking through his body was the air-conditioning
or his utter amazement with the significance of what he was now staring at.
His heart pounded as he circled the body, reading the word upside down, reaffirming the
genius of the symmetry. The symbol seemed even less conceivable now that he was staring at it.
“Mr. Langdon?”
Langdon did not hear. He was in another world… his world, his element, a world where
history, myth, and fact collided, flooding his senses. The gears turned.
“Mr. Langdon?” Kohler’s eyes probed expectantly.
Langdon did not look up. His disposition now intensified, his focus total. “How much do you
already know?”
“Only what I had time to read on your website. The word Illuminati means ‘the enlightened
ones.’ It is the name of some sort of ancient brotherhood.”
Langdon nodded. “Had you heard the name before?”
“Not until I saw it branded on Mr. Vetra.”
“So you ran a web search for it?”
“Yes.”
“And the word returned hundreds of references, no doubt.”
“Thousands,” Kohler said. “Yours, however, contained references to Harvard, Oxford, a
reputable publisher, as well as a list of related publications. As a scientist I have come to learn that
information is only as valuable as its source. Your credentials seemed authentic.”
Langdon’s eyes were still riveted on the body.
Kohler said nothing more. He simply stared, apparently waiting for Langdon to shed some
light on the scene before them.
Langdon looked up, glancing around the frozen flat. “Perhaps we should discuss this in a
warmer place?”
“This room is fine.” Kohler seemed oblivious to the cold. “We’ll talk here.”
Langdon frowned. The Illuminati history was by no means a simple one. I’ll freeze to death
trying to explain it . He gazed again at the brand, feeling a renewed sense of awe.
Although accounts of the Illuminati emblem were legendary in modern symbology, no
academic had ever actually seen it. Ancient documents described the symbol as an
ambigram–ambi meaning “both”–signifying it was legible both ways. And although ambigrams
were common in symbology–swastikas, yin yang, Jewish stars, simple crosses–the idea that a word
could be crafted into an ambigram seemed utterly impossible. Modern symbologists had tried for
years to forge the word “Illuminati” into a perfectly symmetrical style, but they had failed
miserably. Most academics had now decided the symbol’s existence was a myth.
“So who are the Illuminati?” Kohler demanded.
Yes , Langdon thought, who indeed? He began his tale.
“Since the beginning of history,” Langdon explained, “a deep rift has existed between science
and religion. Outspoken scientists like Copernicus–”
“Were murdered,” Kohler interjected. “Murdered by the church for revealing scientific truths.
Religion has always persecuted science.”
“Yes. But in the 1500s, a group of men in Rome fought back against the church. Some of
Italy’s most enlightened men–physicists, mathematicians, astronomers–began meeting secretly to
share their concerns about the church’s inaccurate teachings. They feared that the church’s
monopoly on ‘truth’ threatened academic enlightenment around the world. They founded the
world’s first scientific think tank, calling themselves ‘the enlightened ones.’ ”
“The Illuminati.”
“Yes,” Langdon said. “Europe’s most learned minds… dedicated to the quest for scientific
truth.”
Kohler fell silent.
“Of course, the Illuminati were hunted ruthlessly by the Catholic Church. Only through rites
of extreme secrecy did the scientists remain safe. Word spread through the academic underground,
and the Illuminati brotherhood grew to include academics from all over Europe. The scientists met
regularly in Rome at an ultrasecret lair they called the Church of Illumination .”
Kohler coughed and shifted in his chair.
“Many of the Illuminati,” Langdon continued, “wanted to combat the church’s tyranny with
acts of violence, but their most revered member persuaded them against it. He was a pacifist, as
well as one of history’s most famous scientists.”
Langdon was certain Kohler would recognize the name. Even nonscientists were familiar with
the ill-fated astronomer who had been arrested and almost executed by the church for proclaiming
that the sun , and not the earth, was the center of the solar system. Although his data were
incontrovertible, the astronomer was severely punished for implying that God had placed mankind
somewhere other than at the center of His universe.
“His name was Galileo Galilei,” Langdon said.
Kohler looked up. “Galileo?”
“Yes. Galileo was an Illuminatus. And he was also a devout Catholic. He tried to soften the
church’s position on science by proclaiming that science did not undermine the existence of God,
but rather reinforced it. He wrote once that when he looked through his telescope at the spinning
planets, he could hear God’s voice in the music of the spheres. He held that science and religion
were not enemies, but rather allies –two different languages telling the same story, a story of
symmetry and balance… heaven and hell, night and day, hot and cold, God and Satan. Both science
and religion rejoiced in God’s symmetry… the endless contest of light and dark.” Langdon paused,
stamping his feet to stay warm.
Kohler simply sat in his wheelchair and stared.
“Unfortunately,” Langdon added, “the unification of science and religion was not what the
church wanted.”
“Of course not,” Kohler interrupted. “The union would have nullified the church’s claim as
the sole vessel through which man could understand God. So the church tried Galileo as a heretic,
found him guilty, and put him under permanent house arrest. I am quite aware of scientific history,
Mr. Langdon. But this was all centuries ago. What does it have to do with Leonardo Vetra?”
The million dollar question . Langdon cut to the chase. “Galileo’s arrest threw the Illuminati
into upheaval. Mistakes were made, and the church discovered the identities of four members,
whom they captured and interrogated. But the four scientists revealed nothing… even under
torture.”
“Torture?”
Langdon nodded. “They were branded alive. On the chest. With the symbol of a cross.”
Kohler’s eyes widened, and he shot an uneasy glance at Vetra’s body.
“Then the scientists were brutally murdered, their dead bodies dropped in the streets of Rome
as a warning to others thinking of joining the Illuminati. With the church closing in, the remaining
Illuminati fled Italy.”
Langdon paused to make his point. He looked directly into Kohler’s dead eyes. “The
Illuminati went deep underground, where they began mixing with other refugee groups fleeing the
Catholic purges–mystics, alchemists, occultists, Muslims, Jews. Over the years, the Illuminati
began absorbing new members. A new Illuminati emerged. A darker Illuminati. A deeply
anti-Christian Illuminati. They grew very powerful, employing mysterious rites, deadly secrecy,
vowing someday to rise again and take revenge on the Catholic Church. Their power grew to the
point where the church considered them the single most dangerous anti-Christian force on earth.
The Vatican denounced the brotherhood as Shaitan .”
“Shaitan? ”
“It’s Islamic. It means ‘adversary’… God’s adversary. The church chose Islam for the name
because it was a language they considered dirty.” Langdon hesitated. “Shaitan is the root of an
English word…Satan .”
An uneasiness crossed Kohler’s face.
Langdon’s voice was grim. “Mr. Kohler, I do not know how this marking appeared on this
man’s chest… or why… but you are looking at the long-lost symbol of the world’s oldest and most
powerful satanic cult.”
10
The alley was narrow and deserted. The Hassassin strode quickly now, his black eyes filling
with anticipation. As he approached his destination, Janus’s parting words echoed in his mind.
Phase two begins shortly. Get some rest .
The Hassassin smirked. He had been awake all night, but sleep was the last thing on his mind.
Sleep was for the weak. He was a warrior like his ancestors before him, and his people never slept
once a battle had begun. This battle had most definitely begun, and he had been given the honor of
spilling first blood. Now he had two hours to celebrate his glory before going back to work.
Sleep? There are far better ways to relax…
An appetite for hedonistic pleasure was something bred into him by his ancestors. His
ascendants had indulged in hashish, but he preferred a different kind of gratification. He took pride
in his body–a well-tuned, lethal machine, which, despite his heritage, he refused to pollute with
narcotics. He had developed a more nourishing addiction than drugs… a far more healthy and
satisfying reward.
Feeling a familiar anticipation swelling within him, the Hassassin moved faster down the
alley. He arrived at the nondescript door and rang the bell. A view slit in the door opened, and two
soft brown eyes studied him appraisingly. Then the door swung open.
“Welcome,” the well-dressed woman said. She ushered him into an impeccably furnished
sitting room where the lights were low. The air was laced with expensive perfume and musk.
“Whenever you are ready.” She handed him a book of photographs. “Ring me when you have made
your choice.” Then she disappeared.
The Hassassin smiled.
As he sat on the plush divan and positioned the photo album on his lap, he felt a carnal hunger
stir. Although his people did not celebrate Christmas, he imagined that this is what it must feel like
to be a Christian child, sitting before a stack of Christmas presents, about to discover the miracles
inside. He opened the album and examined the photos. A lifetime of sexual fantasies stared back at
him.
Marisa . An Italian goddess. Fiery. A young Sophia Loren.
Sachiko . A Japanese geisha. Lithe. No doubt skilled.
Kanara . A stunning black vision. Muscular. Exotic.
He examined the entire album twice and made his choice. He pressed a button on the table
beside him. A minute later the woman who had greeted him reappeared. He indicated his selection.
She smiled. “Follow me.”
After handling the financial arrangements, the woman made a hushed phone call. She waited
a few minutes and then led him up a winding marble staircase to a luxurious hallway. “It’s the gold
door on the end,” she said. “You have expensive taste.”
I should , he thought. I am a connoisseur .
The Hassassin padded the length of the hallway like a panther anticipating a long overdue
meal. When he reached the doorway he smiled to himself. It was already ajar… welcoming him in.
He pushed, and the door swung noiselessly open.
When he saw his selection, he knew he had chosen well. She was exactly as he had
requested… nude, lying on her back, her arms tied to the bedposts with thick velvet cords.
He crossed the room and ran a dark finger across her ivory abdomen. I killed last night , he
thought. You are my reward .
11
“Satanic?” Kohler wiped his mouth and shifted uncomfortably. “This is the symbol of a
satanic cult?”
Langdon paced the frozen room to keep warm. “The Illuminati were satanic. But not in the
modern sense.”
Langdon quickly explained how most people pictured satanic cults as devil-worshiping
fiends, and yet Satanists historically were educated men who stood as adversaries to the church.
Shaitan . The rumors of satanic black-magic animal sacrifices and the pentagram ritual were
nothing but lies spread by the church as a smear campaign against their adversaries. Over time,
opponents of the church, wanting to emulate the Illuminati, began believing the lies and acting them
out. Thus, modern Satanism was born.
Kohler grunted abruptly. “This is all ancient history. I want to know how this symbol got here
.”
Langdon took a deep breath. “The symbol itself was created by an anonymous
sixteenth-century Illuminati artist as a tribute to Galileo’s love of symmetry–a kind of sacred
Illuminati logo. The brotherhood kept the design secret, allegedly planning to reveal it only when
they had amassed enough power to resurface and carry out their final goal.”
Kohler looked unsettled. “So this symbol means the Illuminati brotherhood is resurfacing?”
Langdon frowned. “That would be impossible. There is one chapter of Illuminati history that I
have not yet explained.”
Kohler’s voice intensified. “Enlighten me.”
Langdon rubbed his palms together, mentally sorting through the hundreds of documents he’d
read or written on the Illuminati. “The Illuminati were survivors,” he explained. “When they fled
Rome, they traveled across Europe looking for a safe place to regroup. They were taken in by
another secret society… a brotherhood of wealthy Bavarian stone craftsmen called the
Freemasons.”
Kohler looked startled. “The Masons?”
Langdon nodded, not at all surprised that Kohler had heard of the group. The brotherhood of
the Masons currently had over five million members worldwide, half of them residing in the United
States, and over one million of them in Europe.
“Certainly the Masons are not satanic,” Kohler declared, sounding suddenly skeptical.
“Absolutely not. The Masons fell victim of their own benevolence. After harboring the fleeing
scientists in the 1700s, the Masons unknowingly became a front for the Illuminati. The Illuminati
grew within their ranks, gradually taking over positions of power within the lodges. They quietly
reestablished their scientific brotherhood deep within the Masons–a kind of secret society within a
secret society. Then the Illuminati used the worldwide connection of Masonic lodges to spread their
influence.”
Langdon drew a cold breath before racing on. “Obliteration of Catholicism was the
Illuminati’s central covenant. The brotherhood held that the superstitious dogma spewed forth by
the church was mankind’s greatest enemy. They feared that if religion continued to promote pious
myth as absolute fact, scientific progress would halt, and mankind would be doomed to an ignorant
future of senseless holy wars.”
“Much like we see today.”
Langdon frowned. Kohler was right. Holy wars were still making headlines. My God is better
than your God . It seemed there was always close correlation between true believers and high body
counts.
“Go on,” Kohler said.
Langdon gathered his thoughts and continued. “The Illuminati grew more powerful in Europe
and set their sights on America, a fledgling government many of whose leaders were
Masons–George Washington, Ben Franklin–honest, God-fearing men who were unaware of the
Illuminati stronghold on the Masons. The Illuminati took advantage of the infiltration and helped
found banks, universities, and industry to finance their ultimate quest.” Langdon paused. “The
creation of a single unified world state–a kind of secular New World Order .”
Kohler did not move.
“A New World Order,” Langdon repeated, “based on scientific enlightenment. They called it
their Luciferian Doctrine. The church claimed Lucifer was a reference to the devil, but the
brotherhood insisted Lucifer was intended in its literal Latin meaning–bringer of light . Or
Illuminator .”
Kohler sighed, and his voice grew suddenly solemn. “Mr. Langdon, please sit down.”
Langdon sat tentatively on a frost-covered chair.
Kohler moved his wheelchair closer. “I am not sure I understand everything you have just told
me, but I do understand this. Leonardo Vetra was one of CERN’s greatest assets. He was also a
friend. I need you to help me locate the Illuminati.”
Langdon didn’t know how to respond. “Locate the Illuminati?” He’s kidding, right? “I’m
afraid, sir, that will be utterly impossible.”
Kohler’s brow creased. “What do you mean? You won’t–”
“Mr. Kohler.” Langdon leaned toward his host, uncertain how to make him understand what
he was about to say. “I did not finish my story. Despite appearances, it is extremely unlikely that
this brand was put here by the Illuminati. There has been no evidence of their existence for over
half a century, and most scholars agree the Illuminati have been defunct for many years.”
The words hit silence. Kohler stared through the fog with a look somewhere between
stupefaction and anger. “How the hell can you tell me this group is extinct when their name is
seared into this man!”
Langdon had been asking himself that question all morning. The appearance of the Illuminati
ambigram was astonishing. Symbologists worldwide would be dazzled. And yet, the academic in
Langdon understood that the brand’s reemergence proved absolutely nothing about the Illuminati.
“Symbols,” Langdon said, “in no way confirm the presence of their original creators.”
“What is that supposed to mean?”
“It means that when organized philosophies like the Illuminati go out of existence, their
symbols remain… available for adoption by other groups. It’s called transference . It’s very
common in symbology. The Nazis took the swastika from the Hindus, the Christians adopted the
cruciform from the Egyptians, the–”
“This morning,” Kohler challenged, “when I typed the word ‘Illuminati’ into the computer, it
returned thousands of current references. Apparently a lot of people think this group is still active.”
“Conspiracy buffs,” Langdon replied. He had always been annoyed by the plethora of
conspiracy theories that circulated in modern pop culture. The media craved apocalyptic headlines,
and self-proclaimed “cult specialists” were still cashing in on millennium hype with fabricated
stories that the Illuminati were alive and well and organizing their New World Order. Recently the
New York Times had reported the eerie Masonic ties of countless famous men–Sir Arthur Conan
Doyle, the Duke of Kent, Peter Sellers, Irving Berlin, Prince Philip, Louis Armstrong, as well as a
pantheon of well-known modern-day industrialists and banking magnates.
Kohler pointed angrily at Vetra’s body. “Considering the evidence, I would say perhaps the
conspiracy buffs are correct.”
“I realize how it appears,” Langdon said as diplomatically as he could. “And yet a far more
plausible explanation is that some other organization has taken control of the Illuminati brand and
is using it for their own purposes.”
“What purposes? What does this murder prove?”
Good question , Langdon thought. He also was having trouble imagining where anyone could
have turned up the Illuminati brand after 400 years. “All I can tell you is that even if the Illuminati
were still active today, which I am virtually positive they are not, they would never be involved in
Leonardo Vetra’s death.”
“No?”
“No. The Illuminati may have believed in the abolition of Christianity, but they wielded their
power through political and financial means, not through terrorists acts. Furthermore, the Illuminati
had a strict code of morality regarding who they saw as enemies. They held men of science in the
highest regard. There is no way they would have murdered a fellow scientist like Leonardo Vetra.”
Kohler’s eyes turned to ice. “Perhaps I failed to mention that Leonardo Vetra was anything
but an ordinary scientist.”
Langdon exhaled patiently. “Mr. Kohler, I’m sure Leonardo Vetra was brilliant in many ways,
but the fact remains–”
Without warning, Kohler spun in his wheelchair and accelerated out of the living room,
leaving a wake of swirling mist as he disappeared down a hallway.
For the love of God , Langdon groaned. He followed. Kohler was waiting for him in a small
alcove at the end of the hallway.
“This is Leonardo’s study,” Kohler said, motioning to the sliding door. “Perhaps when you
see it you’ll understand things differently.” With an awkward grunt, Kohler heaved, and the door
slid open.
Langdon peered into the study and immediately felt his skin crawl. Holy mother of Jesus , he
said to himself.
12
In another country, a young guard sat patiently before an expansive bank of video monitors.
He watched as images flashed before him–live feeds from hundreds of wireless video cameras that
surveyed the sprawling complex. The images went by in an endless procession.
An ornate hallway.
A private office.
An industrial-size kitchen.
As the pictures went by, the guard fought off a daydream. He was nearing the end of his shift,
and yet he was still vigilant. Service was an honor. Someday he would be granted his ultimate
reward.
As his thoughts drifted, an image before him registered alarm. Suddenly, with a reflexive jerk
that startled even himself, his hand shot out and hit a button on the control panel. The picture before
him froze.
His nerves tingling, he leaned toward the screen for a closer look. The reading on the monitor
told him the image was being transmitted from camera #86–a camera that was supposed to be
overlooking a hallway.
But the image before him was most definitely not a hallway.
13
Langdon stared in bewilderment at the study before him. “What is this place?” Despite the
welcome blast of warm air on his face, he stepped through the door with trepidation.
Kohler said nothing as he followed Langdon inside.
Langdon scanned the room, not having the slightest idea what to make of it. It contained the
most peculiar mix of artifacts he had ever seen. On the far wall, dominating the decor, was an
enormous wooden crucifix, which Langdon placed as fourteenth-century Spanish. Above the
cruciform, suspended from the ceiling, was a metallic mobile of the orbiting planets. To the left was
an oil painting of the Virgin Mary, and beside that was a laminated periodic table of elements. On
the side wall, two additional brass cruciforms flanked a poster of Albert Einstein, his famous quote
reading:
God Does Not Play Dice With the Universe
Langdon moved into the room, looking around in astonishment. A leather-bound Bible sat on
Vetra’s desk beside a plastic Bohr model of an atom and a miniature replica of Michelangelo’s
Moses.
Talk about eclectic , Langdon thought. The warmth felt good, but something about the decor
sent a new set of chills through his body. He felt like he was witnessing the clash of two
philosophical titans… an unsettling blur of opposing forces. He scanned the titles on the bookshelf:
The God Particle
The Tao of Physics
God: The Evidence
One of the bookends was etched with a quote:
True science discovers God waiting behind every door.
Pope Pius XII
“Leonardo was a Catholic priest,” Kohler said.
Langdon turned. “A priest? I thought you said he was a physicist.”
“He was both. Men of science and religion are not unprecedented in history. Leonardo was
one of them. He considered physics ‘God’s natural law.’ He claimed God’s handwriting was visible
in the natural order all around us. Through science he hoped to prove God’s existence to the
doubting masses. He considered himself a theo-physicist.”
Theo-physicist? Langdon thought it sounded impossibly oxymoronic.
“The field of particle physics,” Kohler said, “has made some shocking discoveries
lately–discoveries quite spiritual in implication. Leonardo was responsible for many of them.”
Langdon studied CERN’s director, still trying to process the bizarre surroundings.
“Spirituality and physics?” Langdon had spent his career studying religious history, and if there was
one recurring theme, it was that science and religion had been oil and water since day one…
archenemies… unmixable.
“Vetra was on the cutting edge of particle physics,” Kohler said. “He was starting to fuse
science and religion… showing that they complement each other in most unanticipated ways. He
called the field New Physics .” Kohler pulled a book from the shelf and handed it to Langdon.
Langdon studied the cover. God, Miracles, and the New Physics –by Leonardo Vetra.
“The field is small,” Kohler said, “but it’s bringing fresh answers to some old
questions–questions about the origin of the universe and the forces that bind us all. Leonardo
believed his research had the potential to convert millions to a more spiritual life. Last year he
categorically proved the existence of an energy force that unites us all. He actually demonstrated
that we are all physically connected… that the molecules in your body are intertwined with the
molecules in mine… that there is a single force moving within all of us.”
Langdon felt disconcerted. And the power of God shall unite us all . “Mr. Vetra actually found
a way to demonstrate that particles are connected?”
“Conclusive evidence. A recent Scientific American article hailed New Physics as a surer
path to God than religion itself.”
The comment hit home. Langdon suddenly found himself thinking of the antireligious
Illuminati. Reluctantly, he forced himself to permit a momentary intellectual foray into the
impossible. If the Illuminati were indeed still active, would they have killed Leonardo to stop him
from bringing his religious message to the masses? Langdon shook off the thought. Absurd! The
Illuminati are ancient history! All academics know that!
“Vetra had plenty of enemies in the scientific world,” Kohler went on. “Many scientific
purists despised him. Even here at CERN. They felt that using analytical physics to support
religious principles was a treason against science.”
“But aren’t scientists today a bit less defensive about the church?”
Kohler grunted in disgust. “Why should we be? The church may not be burning scientists at
the stake anymore, but if you think they’ve released their reign over science, ask yourself why half
the schools in your country are not allowed to teach evolution. Ask yourself why the U.S. Christian
Coalition is the most influential lobby against scientific progress in the world. The battle between
science and religion is still raging, Mr. Langdon. It has moved from the battlefields to the
boardrooms, but it is still raging.”
Langdon realized Kohler was right. Just last week the Harvard School of Divinity had
marched on the Biology Building, protesting the genetic engineering taking place in the graduate
program. The chairman of the Bio Department, famed ornithologist Richard Aaronian, defended his
curriculum by hanging a huge banner from his office window. The banner depicted the Christian
“fish” modified with four little feet–a tribute, Aaronian claimed, to the African lungfishes’
evolution onto dry land. Beneath the fish, instead of the word “Jesus,” was the proclamation
“Darwin! ”
A sharp beeping sound cut the air, and Langdon looked up. Kohler reached down into the
array of electronics on his wheelchair. He slipped a beeper out of its holder and read the incoming
message.
“Good. That is Leonardo’s daughter. Ms. Vetra is arriving at the helipad right now. We will
meet her there. I think it best she not come up here and see her father this way.”
Langdon agreed. It would be a shock no child deserved.
“I will ask Ms. Vetra to explain the project she and her father have been working on…
perhaps shedding light on why he was murdered.”
“You think Vetra’s work is why he was killed?”
“Quite possibly. Leonardo told me he was working on something groundbreaking. That is all
he said. He had become very secretive about the project. He had a private lab and demanded
seclusion, which I gladly afforded him on account of his brilliance. His work had been consuming
huge amounts of electric power lately, but I refrained from questioning him.” Kohler rotated toward
the study door. “There is, however, one more thing you need to know before we leave this flat.”
Langdon was not sure he wanted to hear it.
“An item was stolen from Vetra by his murderer.”
“An item?”
“Follow me.”
The director propelled his wheelchair back into the fog-filled living room. Langdon followed,
not knowing what to expect. Kohler maneuvered to within inches of Vetra’s body and stopped. He
ushered Langdon to join him. Reluctantly, Langdon came close, bile rising in his throat at the smell
of the victim’s frozen urine.
“Look at his face,” Kohler said.
Look at his face? Langdon frowned. I thought you said something was stolen .
Hesitantly, Langdon knelt down. He tried to see Vetra’s face, but the head was twisted 180
degrees backward, his face pressed into the carpet.
Struggling against his handicap Kohler reached down and carefully twisted Vetra’s frozen
head. Cracking loudly, the corpse’s face rotated into view, contorted in agony. Kohler held it there a
moment.
“Sweet Jesus!” Langdon cried, stumbling back in horror. Vetra’s face was covered in blood.
A single hazel eye stared lifelessly back at him. The other socket was tattered and empty. “They
stole his eye ?”
14
Langdon stepped out of Building C into the open air, grateful to be outside Vetra’s flat. The
sun helped dissolve the image of the empty eye socket emblazoned into his mind.
“This way, please,” Kohler said, veering up a steep path. The electric wheelchair seemed to
accelerate effortlessly. “Ms. Vetra will be arriving any moment.”
Langdon hurried to keep up.
“So,” Kohler asked. “Do you still doubt the Illuminati’s involvement?”
Langdon had no idea what to think anymore. Vetra’s religious affiliations were definitely
troubling, and yet Langdon could not bring himself to abandon every shred of academic evidence he
had ever researched. Besides, there was the eye…
“I still maintain,” Langdon said, more forcefully than he intended. “that the Illuminati are not
responsible for this murder. The missing eye is proof.”
“What?”
“Random mutilation,” Langdon explained, “is very… un –Illuminati. Cult specialists see
desultory defacement from inexperienced fringe sects–zealots who commit random acts of
terrorism–but the Illuminati have always been more deliberate.”
“Deliberate? Surgically removing someone’s eyeball is not deliberate?”
“It sends no clear message. It serves no higher purpose.”
Kohler’s wheelchair stopped short at the top of the hill. He turned. “Mr. Langdon, believe me,
that missing eye does indeed serve a higher purpose… a much higher purpose.”
As the two men crossed the grassy rise, the beating of helicopter blades became audible to the
west. A chopper appeared, arching across the open valley toward them. It banked sharply, then
slowed to a hover over a helipad painted on the grass.
Langdon watched, detached, his mind churning circles like the blades, wondering if a full
night’s sleep would make his current disorientation any clearer. Somehow, he doubted it.
As the skids touched down, a pilot jumped out and started unloading gear. There was a lot of
it–duffels, vinyl wet bags, scuba tanks, and crates of what appeared to be high-tech diving
equipment.
Langdon was confused. “Is that Ms. Vetra’s gear?” he yelled to Kohler over the roar of the
engines.
Kohler nodded and yelled back, “She was doing biological research in the Balearic Sea.”
“I thought you said she was a physicist !”
“She is. She’s a Bio Entanglement Physicist. She studies the interconnectivity of life systems.
Her work ties closely with her father’s work in particle physics. Recently she disproved one of
Einstein’s fundamental theories by using atomically synchronized cameras to observe a school of
tuna fish.”
Langdon searched his host’s face for any glint of humor. Einstein and tuna fish? He was
starting to wonder if the X-33 space plane had mistakenly dropped him off on the wrong planet.
A moment later, Vittoria Vetra emerged from the fuselage. Robert Langdon realized today
was going to be a day of endless surprises. Descending from the chopper in her khaki shorts and
white sleeveless top, Vittoria Vetra looked nothing like the bookish physicist he had expected. Lithe
and graceful, she was tall with chestnut skin and long black hair that swirled in the backwind of the
rotors. Her face was unmistakably Italian–not overly beautiful, but possessing full, earthy features
that even at twenty yards seemed to exude a raw sensuality. As the air currents buffeted her body,
her clothes clung, accentuating her slender torso and small breasts.
“Ms. Vetra is a woman of tremendous personal strength,” Kohler said, seeming to sense
Langdon’s captivation. “She spends months at a time working in dangerous ecological systems. She
is a strict vegetarian and CERN’s resident guru of Hatha yoga.”
Hatha yoga? Langdon mused. The ancient Buddhist art of meditative stretching seemed an
odd proficiency for the physicist daughter of a Catholic priest.
Langdon watched Vittoria approach. She had obviously been crying, her deep sable eyes
filled with emotions Langdon could not place. Still, she moved toward them with fire and
command. Her limbs were strong and toned, radiating the healthy luminescence of Mediterranean
flesh that had enjoyed long hours in the sun.
“Vittoria,” Kohler said as she approached. “My deepest condolences. It’s a terrible loss for
science… for all of us here at CERN.”
Vittoria nodded gratefully. When she spoke, her voice was smooth–a throaty, accented
English. “Do you know who is responsible yet?”
“We’re still working on it.”
She turned to Langdon, holding out a slender hand. “My name is Vittoria Vetra. You’re from
Interpol, I assume?”
Langdon took her hand, momentarily spellbound by the depth of her watery gaze. “Robert
Langdon.” He was unsure what else to say.
“Mr. Langdon is not with the authorities,” Kohler explained. “He is a specialist from the U.S.
He’s here to help us locate who is responsible for this situation.”
Vittoria looked uncertain. “And the police?”
Kohler exhaled but said nothing.
“Where is his body?” she demanded.
“Being attended to.”
The white lie surprised Langdon.
“I want to see him,” Vittoria said.
“Vittoria,” Kohler urged, “your father was brutally murdered. You would be better to
remember him as he was.”
Vittoria began to speak but was interrupted.
“Hey, Vittoria!” voices called from the distance. “Welcome home!”
She turned. A group of scientists passing near the helipad waved happily.
“Disprove any more of Einstein’s theories?” one shouted.
Another added, “Your dad must be proud!”
Vittoria gave the men an awkward wave as they passed. Then she turned to Kohler, her face
now clouded with confusion. “Nobody knows yet?”
“I decided discretion was paramount.”
“You haven’t told the staff my father was murdered ?” Her mystified tone was now laced
with anger.
Kohler’s tone hardened instantly. “Perhaps you forget, Ms. Vetra, as soon as I report your
father’s murder, there will be an investigation of CERN. Including a thorough examination of his
lab. I have always tried to respect your father’s privacy. Your father has told me only two things
about your current project. One, that it has the potential to bring CERN millions of francs in
licensing contracts in the next decade. And two, that it is not ready for public disclosure because it
is still hazardous technology. Considering these two facts, I would prefer strangers not poke around
inside his lab and either steal his work or kill themselves in the process and hold CERN liable. Do I
make myself clear?”
Vittoria stared, saying nothing. Langdon sensed in her a reluctant respect and acceptance of
Kohler’s logic.
“Before we report anything to the authorities,” Kohler said, “I need to know what you two
were working on. I need you to take us to your lab.”
“The lab is irrelevant,” Vittoria said. “Nobody knew what my father and I were doing. The
experiment could not possibly have anything to do with my father’s murder.”
Kohler exhaled a raspy, ailing breath. “Evidence suggests otherwise.”
“Evidence? What evidence?”
Langdon was wondering the same thing.
Kohler was dabbing his mouth again. “You’ll just have to trust me.”
It was clear, from Vittoria’s smoldering gaze, that she did not.
15
Langdon strode silently behind Vittoria and Kohler as they moved back into the main atrium
where Langdon’s bizarre visit had begun. Vittoria’s legs drove in fluid efficiency–like an Olympic
diver–a potency, Langdon figured, no doubt born from the flexibility and control of yoga. He could
hear her breathing slowly and deliberately, as if somehow trying to filter her grief.
Langdon wanted to say something to her, offer his sympathy. He too had once felt the abrupt
hollowness of unexpectedly losing a parent. He remembered the funeral mostly, rainy and gray.
Two days after his twelfth birthday. The house was filled with gray-suited men from the office, men
who squeezed his hand too hard when they shook it. They were all mumbling words like cardiac
and stress . His mother joked through teary eyes that she’d always been able to follow the stock
market simply by holding her husband’s hand… his pulse her own private ticker tape.
Once, when his father was alive, Langdon had heard his mom begging his father to “stop and
smell the roses.” That year, Langdon bought his father a tiny blown-glass rose for Christmas. It was
the most beautiful thing Langdon had ever seen… the way the sun caught it, throwing a rainbow of
colors on the wall. “It’s lovely,” his father had said when he opened it, kissing Robert on the
forehead. “Let’s find a safe spot for it.” Then his father had carefully placed the rose on a high
dusty shelf in the darkest corner of the living room. A few days later, Langdon got a stool, retrieved
the rose, and took it back to the store. His father never noticed it was gone.
The ping of an elevator pulled Langdon back to the present. Vittoria and Kohler were in front
of him, boarding the lift. Langdon hesitated outside the open doors.
“Is something wrong?” Kohler asked, sounding more impatient than concerned.
“Not at all,” Langdon said, forcing himself toward the cramped carriage. He only used
elevators when absolutely necessary. He preferred the more open spaces of stairwells.
“Dr. Vetra’s lab is subterranean,” Kohler said.
Wonderful , Langdon thought as he stepped across the cleft, feeling an icy wind churn up
from the depths of the shaft. The doors closed, and the car began to descend.
“Six stories,” Kohler said blankly, like an analytical engine.
Langdon pictured the darkness of the empty shaft below them. He tried to block it out by
staring at the numbered display of changing floors. Oddly, the elevator showed only two stops.
Ground Level and LHC .
“What’s LHC stand for?” Langdon asked, trying not to sound nervous.
“Large Hadron Collider,” Kohler said. “A particle accelerator.”
Particle accelerator? Langdon was vaguely familiar with the term. He had first heard it over
dinner with some colleagues at Dunster House in Cambridge. A physicist friend of theirs, Bob
Brownell, had arrived for dinner one night in a rage.
“The bastards canceled it!” Brownell cursed.
“Canceled what?” they all asked.
“The SSC!”
“The what?”
“The Superconducting Super Collider!”
Someone shrugged. “I didn’t know Harvard was building one.”
“Not Harvard!” he exclaimed. “The U.S.! It was going to be the world’s most powerful
particle accelerator! One of the most important scientific projects of the century! Two billion
dollars into it and the Senate sacks the project! Damn Bible-Belt lobbyists!”
When Brownell finally calmed down, he explained that a particle accelerator was a large,
circular tube through which subatomic particles were accelerated. Magnets in the tube turned on
and off in rapid succession to “push” particles around and around until they reached tremendous
velocities. Fully accelerated particles circled the tube at over 180,000 miles per second .
“But that’s almost the speed of light,” one of the professors exclaimed.
“Damn right,” Brownell said. He went on to say that by accelerating two particles in opposite
directions around the tube and then colliding them, scientists could shatter the particles into their
constituent parts and get a glimpse of nature’s most fundamental components. “Particle
accelerators,” Brownell declared, “are critical to the future of science. Colliding particles is the key
to understanding the building blocks of the universe.”
Harvard’s Poet in Residence , a quiet man named Charles Pratt, did not look impressed. “It
sounds to me,” he said, “like a rather Neanderthal approach to science… akin to smashing clocks
together to discern their internal workings.”
Brownell dropped his fork and stormed out of the room.
So CERN has a particle accelerator? Langdon thought, as the elevator dropped. A circular
tube for smashing particles . He wondered why they had buried it underground.
When the elevator thumped to a stop, Langdon was relieved to feel terra firma beneath his
feet. But when the doors slid open, his relief evaporated. Robert Langdon found himself standing
once again in a totally alien world.
The passageway stretched out indefinitely in both directions, left and right. It was a smooth
cement tunnel, wide enough to allow passage of an eighteen wheeler. Brightly lit where they stood,
the corridor turned pitch black farther down. A damp wind rustled out of the darkness–an unsettling
reminder that they were now deep in the earth. Langdon could almost sense the weight of the dirt
and stone now hanging above his head. For an instant he was nine years old… the darkness forcing
him back… back to the five hours of crushing blackness that haunted him still. Clenching his fists,
he fought it off.
Vittoria remained hushed as she exited the elevator and strode off without hesitation into the
darkness without them. Overhead the flourescents flickered on to light her path. The effect was
unsettling, Langdon thought, as if the tunnel were alive… anticipating her every move. Langdon
and Kohler followed, trailing a distance behind. The lights extinguished automatically behind them.
“This particle accelerator,” Langdon said quietly. “It’s down this tunnel someplace?”
“That’s it there.” Kohler motioned to his left where a polished, chrome tube ran along the
tunnel’s inner wall.
Langdon eyed the tube, confused. “That’s the accelerator?” The device looked nothing like
he had imagined. It was perfectly straight, about three feet in diameter, and extended horizontally
the visible length of the tunnel before disappearing into the darkness. Looks more like a high-tech
sewer , Langdon thought. “I thought particle accelerators were circular .”
“This accelerator is a circle,” Kohler said. “It appears straight, but that is an optical illusion.
The circumference of this tunnel is so large that the curve is imperceptible–like that of the earth.”
Langdon was flabbergasted. This is a circle? “But… it must be enormous!”
“The LHC is the largest machine in the world.”
Langdon did a double take. He remembered the CERN driver saying something about a huge
machine buried in the earth. But –
“It is over eight kilometers in diameter… and twenty-seven kilometers long.”
Langdon’s head whipped around. “Twenty-seven kilometers?” He stared at the director and
then turned and looked into the darkened tunnel before him. “This tunnel is twenty-seven
kilometers long? That’s… that’s over sixteen miles!”
Kohler nodded. “Bored in a perfect circle. It extends all the way into France before curving
back here to this spot. Fully accelerated particles will circle the tube more than ten thousand times
in a single second before they collide.”
Langdon’s legs felt rubbery as he stared down the gaping tunnel. “You’re telling me that
CERN dug out millions of tons of earth just to smash tiny particles?”
Kohler shrugged. “Sometimes to find truth, one must move mountains.”
16
Hundreds of miles from CERN, a voice crackled through a walkie-talkie. “Okay, I’m in the
hallway.”
The technician monitoring the video screens pressed the button on his transmitter. “You’re
looking for camera #86. It’s supposed to be at the far end.”
There was a long silence on the radio. The waiting technician broke a light sweat. Finally his
radio clicked.
“The camera isn’t here,” the voice said. “I can see where it was mounted, though. Somebody
must have removed it.”
The technician exhaled heavily. “Thanks. Hold on a second, will you?”
Sighing, he redirected his attention to the bank of video screens in front of him. Huge portions
of the complex were open to the public, and wireless cameras had gone missing before, usually
stolen by visiting pranksters looking for souvenirs. But as soon as a camera left the facility and was
out of range, the signal was lost, and the screen went blank. Perplexed, the technician gazed up at
the monitor. A crystal clear image was still coming from camera #86.
If the camera was stolen , he wondered, why are we still getting a signal? He knew, of
course, there was only one explanation. The camera was still inside the complex, and someone had
simply moved it. But who? And why?
He studied the monitor a long moment. Finally he picked up his walkie-talkie. “Are there any
closets in that stairwell? Any cupboards or dark alcoves?”
The voice replying sounded confused. “No. Why?”
The technician frowned. “Never mind. Thanks for your help.” He turned off his walkie-talkie
and pursed his lips.
Considering the small size of the video camera and the fact that it was wireless, the technician
knew that camera #86 could be transmitting from just about anywhere within the heavily guarded
compound–a densely packed collection of thirty-two separate buildings covering a half-mile radius.
The only clue was that the camera seemed to have been placed somewhere dark. Of course, that
wasn’t much help. The complex contained endless dark locations–maintenance closets, heating
ducts, gardening sheds, bedroom wardrobes, even a labyrinth of underground tunnels. Camera #86
could take weeks to locate.
But that’s the least of my problems , he thought.
Despite the dilemma posed by the camera’s relocation, there was another far more unsettling
matter at hand. The technician gazed up at the image the lost camera was transmitting. It was a
stationary object. A modern-looking device like nothing the technician had ever seen. He studied
the blinking electronic display at its base.
Although the guard had undergone rigorous training preparing him for tense situations, he still
sensed his pulse rising. He told himself not to panic. There had to be an explanation. The object
appeared too small to be of significant danger. Then again, its presence inside the complex was
troubling. Very troubling, indeed.
Today of all days , he thought.
Security was always a top priority for his employer, but today , more than any other day in the
past twelve years, security was of the utmost importance. The technician stared at the object for a
long time and sensed the rumblings of a distant gathering storm.
Then, sweating, he dialed his superior.
17
Not many children could say they remembered the day they met their father, but Vittoria
Vetra could. She was eight years old, living where she always had, Orfanotrofio di Siena , a
Catholic orphanage near Florence, deserted by parents she never knew. It was raining that day. The
nuns had called for her twice to come to dinner, but as always she pretended not to hear. She lay
outside in the courtyard, staring up at the raindrops… feeling them hit her body… trying to guess
where one would land next. The nuns called again, threatening that pneumonia might make an
insufferably headstrong child a lot less curious about nature.
I can’t hear you , Vittoria thought.
She was soaked to the bone when the young priest came out to get her. She didn’t know him.
He was new there. Vittoria waited for him to grab her and drag her back inside. But he didn’t.
Instead, to her wonder, he lay down beside her, soaking his robes in a puddle.
“They say you ask a lot of questions,” the young man said.
Vittoria scowled. “Are questions bad?”
He laughed. “Guess they were right.”
“What are you doing out here?”
“Same thing you’re doing… wondering why raindrops fall.”
“I’m not wondering why they fall! I already know!”
The priest gave her an astonished look. “You do ?”
“Sister Francisca says raindrops are angels’ tears coming down to wash away our sins.”
“Wow!” he said, sounding amazed. “So that explains it.”
“No it doesn’t!” the girl fired back. “Raindrops fall because everything falls! Everything
falls! Not just rain!”
The priest scratched his head, looking perplexed. “You know, young lady, you’re right.
Everything does fall. It must be gravity.”
“It must be what ?”
He gave her an astonished look. “You haven’t heard of gravity ?”
“No.”
The priest shrugged sadly. “Too bad. Gravity answers a lot of questions.”
Vittoria sat up. “What’s gravity?” she demanded. “Tell me!”
The priest gave her a wink. “What do you say I tell you over dinner.”
The young priest was Leonardo Vetra. Although he had been an award-winning physics
student while in university, he’d heard another call and gone into the seminary. Leonardo and
Vittoria became unlikely best friends in the lonely world of nuns and regulations. Vittoria made
Leonardo laugh, and he took her under his wing, teaching her that beautiful things like rainbows
and the rivers had many explanations. He told her about light, planets, stars, and all of nature
through the eyes of both God and science. Vittoria’s innate intellect and curiosity made her a
captivating student. Leonardo protected her like a daughter.
Vittoria was happy too. She had never known the joy of having a father. When every other
adult answered her questions with a slap on the wrist, Leonardo spent hours showing her books. He
even asked what her ideas were. Vittoria prayed Leonardo would stay with her forever. Then one
day, her worst nightmare came true. Father Leonardo told her he was leaving the orphanage.
“I’m moving to Switzerland,” Leonardo said. “I have a grant to study physics at the
University of Geneva.”
“Physics?” Vittoria cried. “I thought you loved God !”
“I do, very much. Which is why I want to study his divine rules. The laws of physics are the
canvas God laid down on which to paint his masterpiece.”
Vittoria was devastated. But Father Leonardo had some other news. He told Vittoria he had
spoken to his superiors, and they said it was okay if Father Leonardo adopted her.
“Would you like me to adopt you?” Leonardo asked.
“What’s adopt mean?” Vittoria said.
Father Leonardo told her.
Vittoria hugged him for five minutes, crying tears of joy. “Oh yes! Yes!”
Leonardo told her he had to leave for a while and get their new home settled in Switzerland,
but he promised to send for her in six months. It was the longest wait of Vittoria’s life, but
Leonardo kept his word. Five days before her ninth birthday, Vittoria moved to Geneva. She
attended Geneva International School during the day and learned from her father at night.
Three years later Leonardo Vetra was hired by CERN. Vittoria and Leonardo relocated to a
wonderland the likes of which the young Vittoria had never imagined.
Vittoria Vetra’s body felt numb as she strode down the LHC tunnel. She saw her muted
reflection in the LHC and sensed her father’s absence. Normally she existed in a state of deep calm,
in harmony with the world around her. But now, very suddenly, nothing made sense. The last three
hours had been a blur.
It had been 10 A.M. in the Balearic Islands when Kohler’s call came through. Your father has
been murdered. Come home immediately . Despite the sweltering heat on the deck of the dive boat,
the words had chilled her to the bone, Kohler’s emotionless tone hurting as much as the news.
Now she had returned home. But home to what? CERN, her world since she was twelve,
seemed suddenly foreign. Her father, the man who had made it magical, was gone.
Deep breaths , she told herself, but she couldn’t calm her mind. The questions circled faster
and faster. Who killed her father? And why? Who was this American “specialist”? Why was Kohler
insisting on seeing the lab?
Kohler had said there was evidence that her father’s murder was related to the current project.
What evidence? Nobody knew what we were working on! And even if someone found out, why
would they kill him?
As she moved down the LHC tunnel toward her father’s lab, Vittoria realized she was about
to unveil her father’s greatest achievement without him there. She had pictured this moment much
differently. She had imagined her father calling CERN’s top scientists to his lab, showing them his
discovery, watching their awestruck faces. Then he would beam with fatherly pride as he explained
to them how it had been one of Vittoria’s ideas that had helped him make the project a reality…
that his daughter had been integral in his breakthrough. Vittoria felt a lump in her throat. My
father and I were supposed to share this moment together . But here she was alone. No colleagues.
No happy faces. Just an American stranger and Maximilian Kohler.
Maximilian Kohler. Der König .
Even as a child, Vittoria had disliked the man. Although she eventually came to respect his
potent intellect, his icy demeanor always seemed inhuman, the exact antithesis of her father’s
warmth. Kohler pursued science for its immaculate logic… her father for its spiritual wonder. And
yet oddly there had always seemed to be an unspoken respect between the two men. Genius ,
someone had once explained to her, accepts genius unconditionally .
Genius , she thought. My father… Dad. Dead .
The entry to Leonardo Vetra’s lab was a long sterile hallway paved entirely in white tile.
Langdon felt like he was entering some kind of underground insane asylum. Lining the corridor
were dozens of framed, black-and-white images. Although Langdon had made a career of studying
images, these were entirely alien to him. They looked like chaotic negatives of random streaks and
spirals. Modern art? he mused. Jackson Pollock on amphetamines?
“Scatter plots,” Vittoria said, apparently noting Langdon’s interest. “Computer
representations of particle collisions. That’s the Z-particle,” she said, pointing to a faint track that
was almost invisible in the confusion. “My father discovered it five years ago. Pure energy–no mass
at all. It may well be the smallest building block in nature. Matter is nothing but trapped energy.”
Matter is energy? Langdon cocked his head. Sounds pretty Zen . He gazed at the tiny streak
in the photograph and wondered what his buddies in the Harvard physics department would say
when he told them he’d spent the weekend hanging out in a Large Hadron Collider admiring
Z-particles.
“Vittoria,” Kohler said, as they approached the lab’s imposing steel door, “I should mention
that I came down here this morning looking for your father.”
Vittoria flushed slightly. “You did?”
“Yes. And imagine my surprise when I discovered he had replaced CERN’s standard keypad
security with something else.” Kohler motioned to an intricate electronic device mounted beside the
door.
“I apologize,” she said. “You know how he was about privacy. He didn’t want anyone but the
two of us to have access.”
Kohler said, “Fine. Open the door.”
Vittoria stood a long moment. Then, pulling a deep breath, she walked to the mechanism on
the wall.
Langdon was in no way prepared for what happened next.
Vittoria stepped up to the device and carefully aligned her right eye with a protruding lens
that looked like a telescope. Then she pressed a button. Inside the machine, something clicked. A
shaft of light oscillated back and forth, scanning her eyeball like a copy machine.
“It’s a retina scan,” she said. “Infallible security. Authorized for two retina patterns only.
Mine and my father’s.”
Robert Langdon stood in horrified revelation. The image of Leonardo Vetra came back in
grisly detail–the bloody face, the solitary hazel eye staring back, and the empty eye socket. He tried
to reject the obvious truth, but then he saw it… beneath the scanner on the white tile floor… faint
droplets of crimson. Dried blood.
Vittoria, thankfully, did not notice.
The steel door slid open and she walked through.
Kohler fixed Langdon with an adamant stare. His message was clear: As I told you… the
missing eye serves a higher purpose .
18
The woman’s hands were tied, her wrists now purple and swollen from chafing. The
mahogany-skinned Hassassin lay beside her, spent, admiring his naked prize. He wondered if her
current slumber was just a deception, a pathetic attempt to avoid further service to him.
He did not care. He had reaped sufficient reward. Sated, he sat up in bed.
In his country women were possessions. Weak. Tools of pleasure. Chattel to be traded like
livestock. And they understood their place. But here , in Europe, women feigned a strength and
independence that both amused and excited him. Forcing them into physical submission was a
gratification he always enjoyed.
Now, despite the contentment in his loins, the Hassassin sensed another appetite growing
within him. He had killed last night, killed and mutilated, and for him killing was like heroin… each
encounter satisfying only temporarily before increasing his longing for more. The exhilaration had
worn off. The craving had returned.
He studied the sleeping woman beside him. Running his palm across her neck, he felt aroused
with the knowledge that he could end her life in an instant. What would it matter? She was
subhuman, a vehicle only of pleasure and service. His strong fingers encircled her throat, savoring
her delicate pulse. Then, fighting desire, he removed his hand. There was work to do. Service to a
higher cause than his own desire.
As he got out of bed, he reveled in the honor of the job before him. He still could not fathom
the influence of this man named Janus and the ancient brotherhood he commanded. Wondrously,
the brotherhood had chosen him . Somehow they had learned of his loathing… and of his skills.
How, he would never know. Their roots reach wide .
Now they had bestowed on him the ultimate honor. He would be their hands and their voice.
Their assassin and their messenger. The one his people knew as Malak al-haq –the Angel of Truth.
19
Vetra’s lab was wildly futuristic.
Stark white and bounded on all sides by computers and specialized electronic equipment, it
looked like some sort of operating room. Langdon wondered what secrets this place could possibly
hold to justify cutting out someone’s eye to gain entrance.
Kohler looked uneasy as they entered, his eyes seeming to dart about for signs of an intruder.
But the lab was deserted. Vittoria moved slowly too… as if the lab felt unknown without her father
there.
Langdon’s gaze landed immediately in the center of the room, where a series of short pillars
rose from the floor. Like a miniature Stonehenge, a dozen or so columns of polished steel stood in a
circle in the middle of the room. The pillars were about three feet tall, reminding Langdon of
museum displays for valuable gems. These pillars, however, were clearly not for precious stones.
Each supported a thick, transparent canister about the size of a tennis ball can. They appeared
empty.
Kohler eyed the canisters, looking puzzled. He apparently decided to ignore them for the time
being. He turned to Vittoria. “Has anything been stolen?”
“Stolen? How?” she argued. “The retina scan only allows entry to us.”
“Just look around.”
Vittoria sighed and surveyed the room for a few moments. She shrugged. “Everything looks
as my father always leaves it. Ordered chaos.”
Langdon sensed Kohler weighing his options, as if wondering how far to push Vittoria… how
much to tell her. Apparently he decided to leave it for the moment. Moving his wheelchair toward
the center of the room, he surveyed the mysterious cluster of seemingly empty canisters.
“Secrets,” Kohler finally said, “are a luxury we can no longer afford.”
Vittoria nodded in acquiescence, looking suddenly emotional, as if being here brought with it
a torrent of memories.
Give her a minute , Langdon thought.
As though preparing for what she was about to reveal, Vittoria closed her eyes and breathed.
Then she breathed again. And again. And again…
Langdon watched her, suddenly concerned. Is she okay? He glanced at Kohler, who
appeared unfazed, apparently having seen this ritual before. Ten seconds passed before Vittoria
opened her eyes.
Langdon could not believe the metamorphosis. Vittoria Vetra had been transformed. Her full
lips were lax, her shoulders down, and her eyes soft and assenting. It was as though she had
realigned every muscle in her body to accept the situation. The resentful fire and personal anguish
had been quelled somehow beneath a deeper, watery cool.
“Where to begin…” she said, her accent unruffled.
“At the beginning,” Kohler said. “Tell us about your father’s experiment.”
“Rectifying science with religion has been my father’s life dream,” Vittoria said. “He hoped
to prove that science and religion are two totally compatible fields–two different approaches to
finding the same truth.” She paused as if unable to believe what she was about to say. “And
recently… he conceived of a way to do that.”
Kohler said nothing.
“He devised an experiment, one he hoped would settle one of the most bitter conflicts in the
history of science and religion.”
Langdon wondered which conflict she could mean. There were so many.
“Creationism,” Vittoria declared. “The battle over how the universe came to be.”
Oh , Langdon thought. The debate .
“The Bible, of course, states that God created the universe,” she explained. “God said, ‘Let
there be light,’ and everything we see appeared out of a vast emptiness. Unfortunately, one of the
fundamental laws of physics states that matter cannot be created out of nothing.”
Langdon had read about this stalemate. The idea that God allegedly created “something from
nothing” was totally contrary to accepted laws of modern physics and therefore, scientists claimed,
Genesis was scientifically absurd.
“Mr. Langdon,” Vittoria said, turning, “I assume you are familiar with the Big Bang Theory?”
Langdon shrugged. “More or less.” The Big Bang, he knew, was the scientifically accepted
model for the creation of the universe. He didn’t really understand it, but according to the theory, a
single point of intensely focused energy erupted in a cataclysmic explosion, expanding outward to
form the universe. Or something like that.
Vittoria continued. “When the Catholic Church first proposed the Big Bang Theory in 1927,
the–”
“I’m sorry?” Langdon interrupted, before he could stop himself. “You say the Big Bang was a
Catholic idea?”
Vittoria looked surprised by his question “Of course. Proposed by a Catholic monk, Georges
Lema?tre in 1927.”
“But, I thought…” he hesitated. “Wasn’t the Big Bang proposed by Harvard astronomer
Edwin Hubble?”
Kohler glowered. “Again, American scientific arrogance. Hubble published in 1929, two
years after Lema?tre.”
Langdon scowled. It’s called the Hubble Telescope, sir–I’ve never heard of any Lema?tre
Telescope!
“Mr. Kohler is right,” Vittoria said, “the idea belonged to Lema?tre. Hubble only confirmed
it by gathering the hard evidence that proved the Big Bang was scientifically probable.”
“Oh,” Langdon said, wondering if the Hubble-fanatics in the Harvard Astronomy Department
ever mentioned Lema?tre in their lectures.
“When Lema?tre first proposed the Big Bang Theory,” Vittoria continued, “scientists claimed
it was utterly ridiculous. Matter, science said, could not be created out of nothing. So, when Hubble
shocked the world by scientifically proving the Big Bang was accurate, the church claimed victory,
heralding this as proof that the Bible was scientifically accurate. The divine truth.”
Langdon nodded, focusing intently now.
“Of course scientists did not appreciate having their discoveries used by the church to
promote religion, so they immediately mathematicized the Big Bang Theory, removed all religious
overtones, and claimed it as their own. Unfortunately for science, however, their equations, even
today, have one serious deficiency that the church likes to point out.”
Kohler grunted. “The singularity .” He spoke the word as if it were the bane of his existence.
“Yes, the singularity,” Vittoria said. “The exact moment of creation. Time zero.” She looked
at Langdon. “Even today, science cannot grasp the initial moment of creation. Our equations
explain the early universe quite effectively, but as we move back in time, approaching time zero,
suddenly our mathematics disintegrates, and everything becomes meaningless.”
“Correct,” Kohler said, his voice edgy, “and the church holds up this deficiency as proof of
God’s miraculous involvement. Come to your point.”
Vittoria’s expression became distant. “My point is that my father had always believed in
God’s involvement in the Big Bang. Even though science was unable to comprehend the divine
moment of creation, he believed someday it would .” She motioned sadly to a laser-printed memo
tacked over her father’s work area. “My dad used to wave that in my face every time I had doubts.”
Langdon read the message:
Science and religion are not at odds.
Science is simply too young to understand.
“My dad wanted to bring science to a higher level,” Vittoria said, “where science supported
the concept of God.” She ran a hand through her long hair, looking melancholy. “He set out to do
something no scientist had ever thought to do. Something that no one has ever had the technology
to do.” She paused, as though uncertain how to speak the next words. “He designed an experiment
to prove Genesis was possible.”
Prove Genesis? Langdon wondered. Let there be light? Matter from nothing?
Kohler’s dead gaze bore across the room. “I beg your pardon?”
“My father created a universe… from nothing at all.”
Kohler snapped his head around. “What!”
“Better said, he recreated the Big Bang.”
Kohler looked ready to jump to his feet.
Langdon was officially lost. Creating a universe? Recreating the Big Bang?
“It was done on a much smaller scale, of course,” Vittoria said, talking faster now. “The
process was remarkably simple. He accelerated two ultrathin particle beams in opposite directions
around the accelerator tube. The two beams collided head-on at enormous speeds, driving into one
another and compressing all their energy into a single pinpoint. He achieved extreme energy
densities.” She started rattling off a stream of units, and the director’s eyes grew wider.
Langdon tried to keep up. So Leonardo Vetra was simulating the compressed point of energy
from which the universe supposedly sprang .
“The result,” Vittoria said, “was nothing short of wondrous. When it is published, it will
shake the very foundation of modern physics.” She spoke slowly now, as though savoring the
immensity of her news. “Without warning, inside the accelerator tube, at this point of highly
focused energy, particles of matter began appearing out of nowhere.”
Kohler made no reaction. He simply stared.
“Matter ,” Vittoria repeated. “Blossoming out of nothing. An incredible display of subatomic
fireworks. A miniature universe springing to life. He proved not only that matter can be created
from nothing, but that the Big Bang and Genesis can be explained simply by accepting the
presence of an enormous source of energy.”
“You mean God ?” Kohler demanded.
“God, Buddha, The Force, Yahweh, the singularity, the unicity point–call it whatever you
like–the result is the same. Science and religion support the same truth–pure energy is the father of
creation.”
When Kohler finally spoke, his voice was somber. “Vittoria, you have me at a loss. It sounds
like you’re telling me your father created matter… out of nothing?”
“Yes.” Vittoria motioned to the canisters. “And there is the proof. In those canisters are
specimens of the matter he created.”
Kohler coughed and moved toward the canisters like a wary animal circling something he
instinctively sensed was wrong. “I’ve obviously missed something,” he said. “How do you expect
anyone to believe these canisters contain particles of matter your father actually created ? They
could be particles from anywhere at all.”
“Actually,” Vittoria said, sounding confident, “they couldn’t. These particles are unique. They
are a type of matter that does not exist anywhere on earth… hence they had to be created.”
Kohler’s expression darkened. “Vittoria, what do you mean a certain type of matter? There
is only one type of matter, and it–” Kohler stopped short.
Vittoria’s expression was triumphant. “You’ve lectured on it yourself, director. The universe
contains two kinds of matter. Scientific fact.” Vittoria turned to Langdon. “Mr. Langdon, what
does the Bible say about the Creation? What did God create?”
Langdon felt awkward, not sure what this had to do with anything. “Um, God created… light
and dark, heaven and hell–”
“Exactly,” Vittoria said. “He created everything in opposites. Symmetry. Perfect balance.”
She turned back to Kohler. “Director, science claims the same thing as religion, that the Big Bang
created everything in the universe with an opposite.”
“Including matter itself,” Kohler whispered, as if to himself.
Vittoria nodded. “And when my father ran his experiment, sure enough, two kinds of matter
appeared.”
Langdon wondered what this meant. Leonardo Vetra created matter’s opposite?
Kohler looked angry. “The substance you’re referring to only exists elsewhere in the
universe. Certainly not on earth. And possibly not even in our galaxy!”
“Exactly,” Vittoria replied, “which is proof that the particles in these canisters had to be
created .”
Kohler’s face hardened. “Vittoria, surely you can’t be saying those canisters contain actual
specimens?”
“I am.” She gazed proudly at the canisters. “Director, you are looking at the world’s first
specimens of antimatter .”
20
Phase two , the Hassassin thought, striding into the darkened tunnel.
The torch in his hand was overkill. He knew that. But it was for effect. Effect was everything.
Fear, he had learned, was his ally. Fear cripples faster than any implement of war .
There was no mirror in the passage to admire his disguise, but he could sense from the
shadow of his billowing robe that he was perfect. Blending in was part of the plan… part of the
depravity of the plot. In his wildest dreams he had never imagined playing this part.
Two weeks ago, he would have considered the task awaiting him at the far end of this tunnel
impossible. A suicide mission. Walking naked into a lion’s lair. But Janus had changed the
definition of impossible.
The secrets Janus had shared with the Hassassin in the last two weeks had been numerous…
this very tunnel being one of them. Ancient, and yet still perfectly passable.
As he drew closer to his enemy, the Hassassin wondered if what awaited him inside would be
as easy as Janus had promised. Janus had assured him someone on the inside would make the
necessary arrangements. Someone on the inside. Incredible . The more he considered it, the more he
realized it was child’s play.
Wahad… tintain… thalatha… arbaa , he said to himself in Arabic as he neared the end.
One… two… three… four…
21
“I sense you’ve heard of antimatter, Mr. Langdon?” Vittoria was studying him, her dark skin
in stark contrast to the white lab.
Langdon looked up. He felt suddenly dumb. “Yes. Well… sort of.”
A faint smile crossed her lips. “You watch Star Trek .”
Langdon flushed. “Well, my students enjoy…” He frowned. “Isn’t antimatter what fuels the
U.S.S. Enterprise ?”
She nodded. “Good science fiction has its roots in good science.”
“So antimatter is real ?”
“A fact of nature. Everything has an opposite. Protons have electrons. Up-quarks have
down-quarks. There is a cosmic symmetry at the subatomic level. Antimatter is yin to matter’s
yang . It balances the physical equation.”
Langdon thought of Galileo’s belief of duality.
“Scientists have known since 1918,” Vittoria said, “that two kinds of matter were created in
the Big Bang. One matter is the kind we see here on earth, making up rocks, trees, people. The other
is its inverse–identical to matter in all respects except that the charges of its particles are reversed.”
Kohler spoke as though emerging from a fog. His voice sounded suddenly precarious. “But
there are enormous technological barriers to actually storing antimatter. What about
neutralization?”
“My father built a reverse polarity vacuum to pull the antimatter positrons out of the
accelerator before they could decay.”
Kohler scowled. “But a vacuum would pull out the matter also. There would be no way to
separate the particles.”
“He applied a magnetic field. Matter arced right, and antimatter arced left. They are polar
opposites.”
At that instant, Kohler’s wall of doubt seemed to crack. He looked up at Vittoria in clear
astonishment and then without warning was overcome by a fit of coughing. “Incred… ible…” he
said, wiping his mouth, “and yet…” It seemed his logic was still resisting. “Yet even if the vacuum
worked , these canisters are made of matter. Antimatter cannot be stored inside canisters made out
of matter . The antimatter would instantly react with–”
“The specimen is not touching the canister,” Vittoria said, apparently expecting the question.
“The antimatter is suspended. The canisters are called ‘antimatter traps’ because they literally trap
the antimatter in the center of the canister, suspending it at a safe distance from the sides and
bottom.”
“Suspended? But… how ?”
“Between two intersecting magnetic fields. Here, have a look.”
Vittoria walked across the room and retrieved a large electronic apparatus. The contraption
reminded Langdon of some sort of cartoon ray gun–a wide cannonlike barrel with a sighting scope
on top and a tangle of electronics dangling below. Vittoria aligned the scope with one of the
canisters, peered into the eyepiece, and calibrated some knobs. Then she stepped away, offering
Kohler a look.
Kohler looked nonplussed. “You collected visible amounts?”
“Five thousand nanograms,” Vittoria said. “A liquid plasma containing millions of positrons.”
“Millions? But a few particles is all anyone has ever detected… anywhere .”
“Xenon,” Vittoria said flatly. “He accelerated the particle beam through a jet of xenon,
stripping away the electrons. He insisted on keeping the exact procedure a secret, but it involved
simultaneously injecting raw electrons into the accelerator.”
Langdon felt lost, wondering if their conversation was still in English.
Kohler paused, the lines in his brow deepening. Suddenly he drew a short breath. He slumped
like he’d been hit with a bullet. “Technically that would leave…”
Vittoria nodded. “Yes. Lots of it.”
Kohler returned his gaze to the canister before him. With a look of uncertainty, he hoisted
himself in his chair and placed his eye to the viewer, peering inside. He stared a long time without
saying anything. When he finally sat down, his forehead was covered with sweat. The lines on his
face had disappeared. His voice was a whisper. “My God… you really did it.”
Vittoria nodded. “My father did it.”
“I… I don’t know what to say.”
Vittoria turned to Langdon. “Would you like a look?” She motioned to the viewing device.
Uncertain what to expect, Langdon moved forward. From two feet away, the canister
appeared empty. Whatever was inside was infinitesimal. Langdon placed his eye to the viewer. It
took a moment for the image before him to come into focus.
Then he saw it.
The object was not on the bottom of the container as he expected, but rather it was floating in
the center–suspended in midair–a shimmering globule of mercurylike liquid. Hovering as if by
magic, the liquid tumbled in space. Metallic wavelets rippled across the droplet’s surface. The
suspended fluid reminded Langdon of a video he had once seen of a water droplet in zero G.
Although he knew the globule was microscopic, he could see every changing gorge and undulation
as the ball of plasma rolled slowly in suspension.
“It’s… floating,” he said.
“It had better be,” Vittoria replied. “Antimatter is highly unstable. Energetically speaking,
antimatter is the mirror image of matter, so the two instantly cancel each other out if they come in
contact. Keeping antimatter isolated from matter is a challenge, of course, because everything on
earth is made of matter. The samples have to be stored without ever touching anything at all–even
air.”
Langdon was amazed. Talk about working in a vacuum .
“These antimatter traps?” Kohler interrupted, looking amazed as he ran a pallid finger around
one’s base. “They are your father’s design?”
“Actually,” she said, “they are mine.”
Kohler looked up.
Vittoria’s voice was unassuming. “My father produced the first particles of antimatter but was
stymied by how to store them. I suggested these. Airtight nanocomposite shells with opposing
electromagnets at each end.”
“It seems your father’s genius has rubbed off.”
“Not really. I borrowed the idea from nature. Portuguese man-o’-wars trap fish between their
tentacles using nematocystic charges. Same principle here. Each canister has two electromagnets,
one at each end. Their opposing magnetic fields intersect in the center of the canister and hold the
antimatter there, suspended in midvacuum.”
Langdon looked again at the canister. Antimatter floating in a vacuum, not touching anything
at all. Kohler was right. It was genius.
“Where’s the power source for the magnets?” Kohler asked.
Vittoria pointed. “In the pillar beneath the trap. The canisters are screwed into a docking port
that continuously recharges them so the magnets never fail.”
“And if the field fails?”
“The obvious. The antimatter falls out of suspension, hits the bottom of the trap, and we see
an annihilation.”
Langdon’s ears pricked up. “Annihilation?” He didn’t like the sound of it.
Vittoria looked unconcerned. “Yes. If antimatter and matter make contact, both are destroyed
instantly. Physicists call the process ‘annihilation.’ ”
Langdon nodded. “Oh.”
“It is nature’s simplest reaction. A particle of matter and a particle of antimatter combine to
release two new particles–called photons. A photon is effectively a tiny puff of light.”
Langdon had read about photons–light particles–the purest form of energy. He decided to
refrain from asking about Captain Kirk’s use of photon torpedoes against the Klingons. “So if the
antimatter falls, we see a tiny puff of light?”
Vittoria shrugged. “Depends what you call tiny. Here, let me demonstrate.” She reached for
the canister and started to unscrew it from its charging podium.
Without warning, Kohler let out a cry of terror and lunged forward, knocking her hands away.
“Vittoria! Are you insane?”
22
Kohler, incredibly, was standing for a moment, teetering on two withered legs. His face was
white with fear. “Vittoria! You can’t remove that trap!”
Langdon watched, bewildered by the director’s sudden panic.
“Five hundred nanograms!” Kohler said. “If you break the magnetic field–”
“Director,” Vittoria assured, “it’s perfectly safe. Every trap has a failsafe–a back-up battery in
case it is removed from its recharger. The specimen remains suspended even if I remove the
canister.”
Kohler looked uncertain. Then, hesitantly, he settled back into his chair.
“The batteries activate automatically,” Vittoria said, “when the trap is moved from the
recharger. They work for twenty-four hours. Like a reserve tank of gas.” She turned to Langdon, as
if sensing his discomfort. “Antimatter has some astonishing characteristics, Mr. Langdon, which
make it quite dangerous. A ten milligram sample–the volume of a grain of sand–is hypothesized to
hold as much energy as about two hundred metric tons of conventional rocket fuel.”
Langdon’s head was spinning again.
“It is the energy source of tomorrow. A thousand times more powerful than nuclear energy.
One hundred percent efficient. No byproducts. No radiation. No pollution. A few grams could
power a major city for a week.”
Grams? Langdon stepped uneasily back from the podium.
“Don’t worry,” Vittoria said. “These samples are minuscule fractions of a gram–millionths .
Relatively harmless.” She reached for the canister again and twisted it from its docking platform.
Kohler twitched but did not interfere. As the trap came free, there was a sharp beep, and a
small LED display activated near the base of the trap. The red digits blinked, counting down from
twenty-four hours.
24:00:00…
23:59:59…
23:59:58…
Langdon studied the descending counter and decided it looked unsettlingly like a time bomb.
“The battery,” Vittoria explained, “will run for the full twenty-four hours before dying. It can
be recharged by placing the trap back on the podium. It’s designed as a safety measure, but it’s also
convenient for transport.”
“Transport?” Kohler looked thunderstruck. “You take this stuff out of the lab?”
“Of course not,” Vittoria said. “But the mobility allows us to study it.”
Vittoria led Langdon and Kohler to the far end of the room. She pulled a curtain aside to
reveal a window, beyond which was a large room. The walls, floors, and ceiling were entirely
plated in steel. The room reminded Langdon of the holding tank of an oil freighter he had once
taken to Papua New Guinea to study Hanta body graffiti.
“It’s an annihilation tank,” Vittoria declared.
Kohler looked up. “You actually observe annihilations?”
“My father was fascinated with the physics of the Big Bang–large amounts of energy from
minuscule kernels of matter.” Vittoria pulled open a steel drawer beneath the window. She placed
the trap inside the drawer and closed it. Then she pulled a lever beside the drawer. A moment later,
the trap appeared on the other side of the glass, rolling smoothly in a wide arc across the metal floor
until it came to a stop near the center of the room.
Vittoria gave a tight smile. “You’re about to witness your first antimatter-matter annihilation.
A few millionths of a gram. A relatively minuscule specimen.”
Langdon looked out at the antimatter trap sitting alone on the floor of the enormous tank.
Kohler also turned toward the window, looking uncertain.
“Normally,” Vittoria explained, “we’d have to wait the full twenty-four hours until the
batteries died, but this chamber contains magnets beneath the floor that can override the trap,
pulling the antimatter out of suspension. And when the matter and antimatter touch…”
“Annihilation,” Kohler whispered.
“One more thing,” Vittoria said. “Antimatter releases pure energy. A one hundred percent
conversion of mass to photons. So don’t look directly at the sample. Shield your eyes.”
Langdon was wary, but he now sensed Vittoria was being overly dramatic. Don’t look directly
at the canister? The device was more than thirty yards away, behind an ultrathick wall of tinted
Plexiglas. Moreover, the speck in the canister was invisible, microscopic. Shield my eyes?
Langdon thought. How much energy could that speck possibly –
Vittoria pressed the button.
Instantly, Langdon was blinded. A brilliant point of light shone in the canister and then
exploded outward in a shock wave of light that radiated in all directions, erupting against the
window before him with thunderous force. He stumbled back as the detonation rocked the vault.
The light burned bright for a moment, searing, and then, after an instant, it rushed back inward,
absorbing in on itself, and collapsing into a tiny speck that disappeared to nothing. Langdon blinked
in pain, slowly recovering his eyesight. He squinted into the smoldering chamber. The canister on
the floor had entirely disappeared. Vaporized. Not a trace.
He stared in wonder. “G… God.”
Vittoria nodded sadly. “That’s precisely what my father said.”
23
Kohler was staring into the annihilation chamber with a look of utter amazement at the
spectacle he had just seen. Robert Langdon was beside him, looking even more dazed.
“I want to see my father,” Vittoria demanded. “I showed you the lab. Now I want to see my
father.”
Kohler turned slowly, apparently not hearing her. “Why did you wait so long, Vittoria? You
and your father should have told me about this discovery immediately.”
Vittoria stared at him. How many reasons do you want? “Director, we can argue about this
later. Right now, I want to see my father.”
“Do you know what this technology implies?”
“Sure,” Vittoria shot back. “Revenue for CERN. A lot of it. Now I want–”
“Is that why you kept it secret?” Kohler demanded, clearly baiting her. “Because you feared
the board and I would vote to license it out?”
“It should be licensed,” Vittoria fired back, feeling herself dragged into the argument.
“Antimatter is important technology. But it’s also dangerous. My father and I wanted time to refine
the procedures and make it safe.”
“In other words, you didn’t trust the board of directors to place prudent science before
financial greed.”
Vittoria was surprised with the indifference in Kohler’s tone. “There were other issues as
well,” she said. “My father wanted time to present antimatter in the appropriate light.”
“Meaning?”
What do you think I mean? “Matter from energy? Something from nothing? It’s practically
proof that Genesis is a scientific possibility.”
“So he didn’t want the religious implications of his discovery lost in an onslaught of
commercialism?”
“In a manner of speaking.”
“And you?”
Vittoria’s concerns, ironically, were somewhat the opposite. Commercialism was critical for
the success of any new energy source. Although antimatter technology had staggering potential as
an efficient and nonpolluting energy source–if unveiled prematurely, antimatter ran the risk of being
vilified by the politics and PR fiascoes that had killed nuclear and solar power. Nuclear had
proliferated before it was safe, and there were accidents. Solar had proliferated before it was
efficient, and people lost money. Both technologies got bad reputations and withered on the vine.
“My interests,” Vittoria said, “were a bit less lofty than uniting science and religion.”
“The environment,” Kohler ventured assuredly.
“Limitless energy. No strip mining. No pollution. No radiation. Antimatter technology could
save the planet.”
“Or destroy it,” Kohler quipped. “Depending on who uses it for what.” Vittoria felt a chill
emanating from Kohler’s crippled form. “Who else knew about this?” he asked.
“No one,” Vittoria said. “I told you that.”
“Then why do you think your father was killed?”
Vittoria’s muscles tightened. “I have no idea. He had enemies here at CERN, you know that,
but it couldn’t have had anything to do with antimatter. We swore to each other to keep it between
us for another few months, until we were ready.”
“And you’re certain your father kept his vow of silence?”
Now Vittoria was getting mad. “My father has kept tougher vows than that!”
“And you told no one?”
“Of course not!”
Kohler exhaled. He paused, as though choosing his next words carefully. “Suppose someone
did find out. And suppose someone gained access to this lab. What do you imagine they would be
after? Did your father have notes down here? Documentation of his processes?”
“Director, I’ve been patient. I need some answers now. You keep talking about a break-in, but
you saw the retina scan. My father has been vigilant about secrecy and security.”
“Humor me,” Kohler snapped, startling her. “What would be missing?”
“I have no idea.” Vittoria angrily scanned the lab. All the antimatter specimens were
accounted for. Her father’s work area looked in order. “Nobody came in here,” she declared.
“Everything up here looks fine.”
Kohler looked surprised. “Up here?”
Vittoria had said it instinctively. “Yes, here in the upper lab.”
“You’re using the lower lab too?”
“For storage.”
Kohler rolled toward her, coughing again. “You’re using the Haz-Mat chamber for storage?
Storage of what ?”
Hazardous material, what else! Vittoria was losing her patience. “Antimatter.”
Kohler lifted himself on the arms of his chair. “There are other specimens? Why the hell
didn’t you tell me!”
“I just did,” Vittoria fired back. “And you’ve barely given me a chance!”
“We need to check those specimens,” Kohler said. “Now.”
“Specimen,” Vittoria corrected. “Singular. And it’s fine. Nobody could ever–”
“Only one?” Kohler hesitated. “Why isn’t it up here?”
“My father wanted it below the bedrock as a precaution. It’s larger than the others.”
The look of alarm that shot between Kohler and Langdon was not lost on Vittoria. Kohler
rolled toward her again. “You created a specimen larger than five hundred nanograms?”
“A necessity,” Vittoria defended. “We had to prove the input/yield threshold could be safely
crossed.” The question with new fuel sources, she knew, was always one of input vs. yield–how
much money one had to expend to harvest the fuel. Building an oil rig to yield a single barrel of oil
was a losing endeavor. However, if that same rig, with minimal added expense, could deliver
millions of barrels, then you were in business. Antimatter was the same way. Firing up sixteen
miles of electromagnets to create a tiny specimen of antimatter expended more energy than the
resulting antimatter contained. In order to prove antimatter efficient and viable, one had to create
specimens of a larger magnitude.
Although Vittoria’s father had been hesitant to create a large specimen, Vittoria had pushed
him hard. She argued that in order for antimatter to be taken seriously, she and her father had to
prove two things. First, that cost-effective amounts could be produced. And second, that the
specimens could be safely stored. In the end she had won, and her father had acquiesced against his
better judgment. Not, however, without some firm guidelines regarding secrecy and access. The
antimatter, her father had insisted, would be stored in Haz-Mat–a small granite hollow, an
additional seventy-five feet below ground. The specimen would be their secret. And only the two of
them would have access.
“Vittoria?” Kohler insisted, his voice tense. “How large a specimen did you and your father
create?”
Vittoria felt a wry pleasure inside. She knew the amount would stun even the great
Maximilian Kohler. She pictured the antimatter below. An incredible sight. Suspended inside the
trap, perfectly visible to the naked eye, danced a tiny sphere of antimatter. This was no microscopic
speck. This was a droplet the size of a BB.
Vittoria took a deep breath. “A full quarter of a gram.”
The blood drained from Kohler’s face. “What!” He broke into a fit of coughing. “A quarter of
a gram? That converts to… almost five kilotons!”
Kilotons . Vittoria hated the word. It was one she and her father never used. A kiloton was
equal to 1,000 metric tons of TNT. Kilotons were for weaponry. Payload. Destructive power. She
and her father spoke in electron volts and joules–constructive energy output.
“That much antimatter could literally liquidate everything in a half-mile radius!” Kohler
exclaimed.
“Yes, if annihilated all at once,” Vittoria shot back, “which nobody would ever do!”
“Except someone who didn’t know better. Or if your power source failed!” Kohler was
already heading for the elevator.
“Which is why my father kept it in Haz-Mat under a fail-safe power and a redundant security
system.”
Kohler turned, looking hopeful. “You have additional security on Haz-Mat?”
“Yes. A second retina-scan.”
Kohler spoke only two words. “Downstairs. Now.”
The freight elevator dropped like a rock.
Another seventy-five feet into the earth.
Vittoria was certain she sensed fear in both men as the elevator fell deeper. Kohler’s usually
emotionless face was taut. I know , Vittoria thought, the sample is enormous, but the precautions
we’ve taken are –
They reached the bottom.
The elevator opened, and Vittoria led the way down the dimly lit corridor. Up ahead the
corridor dead-ended at a huge steel door. HAZ-MAT. The retina scan device beside the door was
identical to the one upstairs. She approached. Carefully, she aligned her eye with the lens.
She pulled back. Something was wrong. The usually spotless lens was spattered… smeared
with something that looked like… blood ? Confused she turned to the two men, but her gaze met
waxen faces. Both Kohler and Langdon were white, their eyes fixed on the floor at her feet.
Vittoria followed their line of sight… down.
“No!” Langdon yelled, reaching for her. But it was too late.
Vittoria’s vision locked on the object on the floor. It was both utterly foreign and intimately
familiar to her.
It took only an instant.
Then, with a reeling horror, she knew. Staring up at her from the floor, discarded like a piece
of trash, was an eyeball. She would have recognized that shade of hazel anywhere.
24
The security technician held his breath as his commander leaned over his shoulder, studying
the bank of security monitors before them. A minute passed.
The commander’s silence was to be expected, the technician told himself. The commander
was a man of rigid protocol. He had not risen to command one of the world’s most elite security
forces by talking first and thinking second.
But what is he thinking?
The object they were pondering on the monitor was a canister of some sort–a canister with
transparent sides. That much was easy. It was the rest that was difficult.
Inside the container, as if by some special effect, a small droplet of metallic liquid seemed to
be floating in midair. The droplet appeared and disappeared in the robotic red blinking of a digital
LED descending resolutely, making the technician’s skin crawl.
“Can you lighten the contrast?” the commander asked, startling the technician.
The technician heeded the instruction, and the image lightened somewhat. The commander
leaned forward, squinting closer at something that had just come visible on the base of the
container.
The technician followed his commander’s gaze. Ever so faintly, printed next to the LED was
an acronym. Four capital letters gleaming in the intermittent spurts of light.
“Stay here,” the commander said. “Say nothing. I’ll handle this.”
25
Haz-Mat. Fifty meters below ground.
Vittoria Vetra stumbled forward, almost falling into the retina scan. She sensed the American
rushing to help her, holding her, supporting her weight. On the floor at her feet, her father’s eyeball
stared up. She felt the air crushed from her lungs. They cut out his eye! Her world twisted. Kohler
pressed close behind, speaking. Langdon guided her. As if in a dream, she found herself gazing into
the retina scan. The mechanism beeped.
The door slid open.
Even with the terror of her father’s eye boring into her soul, Vittoria sensed an additional
horror awaited inside. When she leveled her blurry gaze into the room, she confirmed the next
chapter of the nightmare. Before her, the solitary recharging podium was empty.
The canister was gone. They had cut out her father’s eye to steal it. The implications came too
fast for her to fully comprehend. Everything had backfired. The specimen that was supposed to
prove antimatter was a safe and viable energy source had been stolen. But nobody knew this
specimen even existed! The truth, however, was undeniable. Someone had found out. Vittoria
could not imagine who. Even Kohler, whom they said knew everything at CERN, clearly had no
idea about the project.
Her father was dead. Murdered for his genius.
As the grief strafed her heart, a new emotion surged into Vittoria’s conscious. This one was
far worse. Crushing. Stabbing at her. The emotion was guilt. Uncontrollable, relentless guilt.
Vittoria knew it had been she who convinced her father to create the specimen. Against his better
judgment. And he had been killed for it.
A quarter of a gram…
Like any technology–fire, gunpowder, the combustion engine–in the wrong hands, antimatter
could be deadly. Very deadly. Antimatter was a lethal weapon. Potent, and unstoppable. Once
removed from its recharging platform at CERN, the canister would count down inexorably. A
runaway train.
And when time ran out…
A blinding light. The roar of thunder. Spontaneous incineration. Just the flash… and an empty
crater. A big empty crater.
The image of her father’s quiet genius being used as a tool of destruction was like poison in
her blood. Antimatter was the ultimate terrorist weapon. It had no metallic parts to trip metal
detectors, no chemical signature for dogs to trace, no fuse to deactivate if the authorities located the
canister. The countdown had begun…
Langdon didn’t know what else to do. He took his handkerchief and lay it on the floor over
Leonardo Vetra’s eyeball. Vittoria was standing now in the doorway of the empty Haz-Mat
chamber, her expression wrought with grief and panic. Langdon moved toward her again,
instinctively, but Kohler intervened.
“Mr. Langdon?” Kohler’s face was expressionless. He motioned Langdon out of earshot.
Langdon reluctantly followed, leaving Vittoria to fend for herself. “You’re the specialist,” Kohler
said, his whisper intense. “I want to know what these Illuminati bastards intend to do with this
antimatter.”
Langdon tried to focus. Despite the madness around him, his first reaction was logical.
Academic rejection. Kohler was still making assumptions. Impossible assumptions. “The Illuminati
are defunct, Mr. Kohler. I stand by that. This crime could be anything–maybe even another CERN
employee who found out about Mr. Vetra’s breakthrough and thought the project was too dangerous
to continue.”
Kohler looked stunned. “You think this is a crime of conscience , Mr. Langdon? Absurd.
Whoever killed Leonardo wanted one thing–the antimatter specimen. And no doubt they have plans
for it.”
“You mean terrorism.”
“Plainly.”
“But the Illuminati were not terrorists.”
“Tell that to Leonardo Vetra.”
Langdon felt a pang of truth in the statement. Leonardo Vetra had indeed been branded with
the Illuminati symbol. Where had it come from? The sacred brand seemed too difficult a hoax for
someone trying to cover his tracks by casting suspicion elsewhere. There had to be another
explanation.
Again, Langdon forced himself to consider the implausible. If the Illuminati were still active,
and if they stole the antimatter, what would be their intention? What would be their target? The
answer furnished by his brain was instantaneous. Langdon dismissed it just as fast. True, the
Illuminati had an obvious enemy, but a wide-scale terrorist attack against that enemy was
inconceivable. It was entirely out of character. Yes, the Illuminati had killed people, but individuals
, carefully conscripted targets. Mass destruction was somehow heavy-handed. Langdon paused.
Then again, he thought, there would be a rather majestic eloquence to it–antimatter, the ultimate
scientific achievement, being used to vaporize–
He refused to accept the preposterous thought. “There is,” he said suddenly, “a logical
explanation other than terrorism.”
Kohler stared, obviously waiting.
Langdon tried to sort out the thought. The Illuminati had always wielded tremendous power
through financial means. They controlled banks. They owned gold bullion. They were even
rumored to possess the single most valuable gem on earth–the Illuminati Diamond, a flawless
diamond of enormous proportions. “Money,” Langdon said. “The antimatter could have been stolen
for financial gain.”
Kohler looked incredulous. “Financial gain? Where does one sell a droplet of antimatter?”
“Not the specimen,” Langdon countered. “The technology. Antimatter technology must be
worth a mint. Maybe someone stole the specimen to do analysis and R and D.”
“Industrial espionage? But that canister has twenty-four hours before the batteries die. The
researchers would blow themselves up before they learned anything at all.”
“They could recharge it before it explodes. They could build a compatible recharging podium
like the ones here at CERN.”
“In twenty-four hours?” Kohler challenged. “Even if they stole the schematics, a recharger
like that would take months to engineer, not hours!”
“He’s right.” Vittoria’s voice was frail.
Both men turned. Vittoria was moving toward them, her gait as tremulous as her words.
“He’s right. Nobody could reverse engineer a recharger in time. The interface alone would
take weeks. Flux filters, servo-coils, power conditioning alloys, all calibrated to the specific energy
grade of the locale.”
Langdon frowned. The point was taken. An antimatter trap was not something one could
simply plug into a wall socket. Once removed from CERN, the canister was on a one-way,
twenty-four-hour trip to oblivion.
Which left only one, very disturbing, conclusion.
“We need to call Interpol,” Vittoria said. Even to herself, her voice sounded distant. “We need
to call the proper authorities. Immediately.”
Kohler shook his head. “Absolutely not.”
The words stunned her. “No? What do you mean?”
“You and your father have put me in a very difficult position here.”
“Director, we need help. We need to find that trap and get it back here before someone gets
hurt. We have a responsibility!”
“We have a responsibility to think ,” Kohler said, his tone hardening. “This situation could
have very, very serious repercussions for CERN.”
“You’re worried about CERN’s reputation ? Do you know what that canister could do to an
urban area? It has a blast radius of a half mile! Nine city blocks!”
“Perhaps you and your father should have considered that before you created the specimen.”
Vittoria felt like she’d been stabbed. “But… we took every precaution.”
“Apparently, it was not enough.”
“But nobody knew about the antimatter.” She realized, of course, it was an absurd argument.
Of course somebody knew. Someone had found out.
Vittoria had told no one. That left only two explanations. Either her father had taken someone
into his confidence without telling her, which made no sense because it was her father who had
sworn them both to secrecy, or she and her father had been monitored. The cell phone maybe? She
knew they had spoken a few times while Vittoria was traveling. Had they said too much? It was
possible. There was also their E-mail. But they had been discreet, hadn’t they? CERN’s security
system? Had they been monitored somehow without their knowledge? She knew none of that
mattered anymore. What was done, was done. My father is dead .
The thought spurred her to action. She pulled her cell phone from her shorts pocket.
Kohler accelerated toward her, coughing violently, eyes flashing anger. “Who… are you
calling?”
“CERN’s switchboard. They can connect us to Interpol.”
“Think!” Kohler choked, screeching to a halt in front of her. “Are you really so naive? That
canister could be anywhere in the world by now. No intelligence agency on earth could possibly
mobilize to find it in time.”
“So we do nothing ?” Vittoria felt compunction challenging a man in such frail health, but the
director was so far out of line she didn’t even know him anymore.
“We do what is smart ,” Kohler said. “We don’t risk CERN’s reputation by involving
authorities who cannot help anyway. Not yet. Not without thinking.”
Vittoria knew there was logic somewhere in Kohler’s argument, but she also knew that logic,
by definition, was bereft of moral responsibility. Her father had lived for moral
responsibility–careful science, accountability, faith in man’s inherent goodness. Vittoria believed in
those things too, but she saw them in terms of karma . Turning away from Kohler, she snapped
open her phone.
“You can’t do that,” he said.
“Just try and stop me.”
Kohler did not move.
An instant later, Vittoria realized why. This far underground, her cell phone had no dial tone.
Fuming, she headed for the elevator.
26
The Hassassin stood at the end of the stone tunnel. His torch still burned bright, the smoke
mixing with the smell of moss and stale air. Silence surrounded him. The iron door blocking his
way looked as old as the tunnel itself, rusted but still holding strong. He waited in the darkness,
trusting.
It was almost time.
Janus had promised someone on the inside would open the door. The Hassassin marveled at
the betrayal. He would have waited all night at that door to carry out his task, but he sensed it would
not be necessary. He was working for determined men.
Minutes later, exactly at the appointed hour, there was a loud clank of heavy keys on the other
side of the door. Metal scraped on metal as multiple locks disengaged. One by one, three huge
deadbolts ground open. The locks creaked as if they had not been used in centuries. Finally all three
were open.
Then there was silence.
The Hassassin waited patiently, five minutes, exactly as he had been told. Then, with
electricity in his blood, he pushed. The great door swung open.
27
“Vittoria, I will not allow it!” Kohler’s breath was labored and getting worse as the Haz-Mat
elevator ascended.
Vittoria blocked him out. She craved sanctuary, something familiar in this place that no
longer felt like home. She knew it was not to be. Right now, she had to swallow the pain and act.
Get to a phone .
Robert Langdon was beside her, silent as usual. Vittoria had given up wondering who the man
was. A specialist? Could Kohler be any less specific? Mr. Langdon can help us find your father’s
killer . Langdon was being no help at all. His warmth and kindness seemed genuine, but he was
clearly hiding something. They both were.
Kohler was at her again. “As director of CERN, I have a responsibility to the future of
science. If you amplify this into an international incident and CERN suffers–”
“Future of science?” Vittoria turned on him. “Do you really plan to escape accountability by
never admitting this antimatter came from CERN? Do you plan to ignore the people’s lives we’ve
put in danger?”
“Not we ,” Kohler countered. “You . You and your father.”
Vittoria looked away.
“And as far as endangering lives,” Kohler said, “life is exactly what this is about. You know
antimatter technology has enormous implications for life on this planet. If CERN goes bankrupt,
destroyed by scandal, everybody loses. Man’s future is in the hands of places like CERN, scientists
like you and your father, working to solve tomorrow’s problems.”
Vittoria had heard Kohler’s Science-as-God lecture before, and she never bought it. Science
itself caused half the problems it was trying to solve. “Progress” was Mother Earth’s ultimate
malignancy.
“Scientific advancement carries risk,” Kohler argued. “It always has. Space programs, genetic
research, medicine–they all make mistakes. Science needs to survive its own blunders, at any cost.
For everyone ’s sake.”
Vittoria was amazed at Kohler’s ability to weigh moral issues with scientific detachment. His
intellect seemed to be the product of an icy divorce from his inner spirit. “You think CERN is so
critical to the earth’s future that we should be immune from moral responsibility?”
“Do not argue morals with me. You crossed a line when you made that specimen, and you
have put this entire facility at risk. I’m trying to protect not only the jobs of the three thousand
scientists who work here, but also your father’s reputation. Think about him . A man like your
father does not deserve to be remembered as the creator of a weapon of mass destruction.”
Vittoria felt his spear hit home. I am the one who convinced my father to create that specimen.
This is my fault!
When the door opened, Kohler was still talking. Vittoria stepped out of the elevator, pulled
out her phone, and tried again.
Still no dial tone. Damn! She headed for the door.
“Vittoria, stop.” The director sounded asthmatic now, as he accelerated after her. “Slow
down. We need to talk.”
“Basta di parlare! ”
“Think of your father,” Kohler urged. “What would he do?”
She kept going.
“Vittoria, I haven’t been totally honest with you.”
Vittoria felt her legs slow.
“I don’t know what I was thinking,” Kohler said. “I was just trying to protect you. Just tell me
what you want. We need to work together here.”
Vittoria came to a full stop halfway across the lab, but she did not turn. “I want to find the
antimatter. And I want to know who killed my father.” She waited.
Kohler sighed. “Vittoria, we already know who killed your father. I’m sorry.”
Now Vittoria turned. “You what?”
“I didn’t know how to tell you. It’s a difficult–”
“You know who killed my father?”
“We have a very good idea, yes. The killer left somewhat of a calling card. That’s the reason I
called Mr. Langdon. The group claiming responsibility is his specialty.”
“The group? A terrorist group?”
“Vittoria, they stole a quarter gram of antimatter.”
Vittoria looked at Robert Langdon standing there across the room. Everything began falling
into place. That explains some of the secrecy . She was amazed it hadn’t occurred to her earlier.
Kohler had called the authorities after all. The authorities. Now it seemed obvious. Robert
Langdon was American, clean-cut, conservative, obviously very sharp. Who else could it be?
Vittoria should have guessed from the start. She felt a newfound hope as she turned to him.
“Mr. Langdon, I want to know who killed my father. And I want to know if your agency can
find the antimatter.”
Langdon looked flustered. “My agency?”
“You’re with U.S. Intelligence, I assume.”
“Actually… no.”
Kohler intervened. “Mr. Langdon is a professor of art history at Harvard University.”
Vittoria felt like she had been doused with ice water. “An art teacher?”
“He is a specialist in cult symbology.” Kohler sighed. “Vittoria, we believe your father was
killed by a satanic cult.”
Vittoria heard the words in her mind, but she was unable to process them. A satanic cult .
“The group claiming responsibility calls themselves the Illuminati.”
Vittoria looked at Kohler and then at Langdon, wondering if this was some kind of perverse
joke. “The Illuminati?” she demanded. “As in the Bavarian Illuminati?”
Kohler looked stunned. “You’ve heard of them?”
Vittoria felt the tears of frustration welling right below the surface. “Bavarian Illuminati: New
World Order . Steve Jackson computer games. Half the techies here play it on the Internet.” Her
voice cracked. “But I don’t understand…”
Kohler shot Langdon a confused look.
Langdon nodded. “Popular game. Ancient brotherhood takes over the world. Semihistorical. I
didn’t know it was in Europe too.”
Vittoria was bewildered. “What are you talking about? The Illuminati? It’s a computer
game!”
“Vittoria,” Kohler said, “the Illuminati is the group claiming responsibility for your father’s
death.”
Vittoria mustered every bit of courage she could find to fight the tears. She forced herself to
hold on and assess the situation logically. But the harder she focused, the less she understood. Her
father had been murdered. CERN had suffered a major breach of security. There was a bomb
counting down somewhere that she was responsible for. And the director had nominated an art
teacher to help them find a mythical fraternity of Satanists.
Vittoria felt suddenly all alone. She turned to go, but Kohler cut her off. He reached for
something in his pocket. He produced a crumpled piece of fax paper and handed it to her.
Vittoria swayed in horror as her eyes hit the image.
“They branded him,” Kohler said. “They branded his goddamn chest.”
28
Secretary Sylvie Baudeloque was now in a panic. She paced outside the director’s empty
office. Where the hell is he? What do I do?
It had been a bizarre day. Of course, any day working for Maximilian Kohler had the potential
to be strange, but Kohler had been in rare form today.
“Find me Leonardo Vetra!” he had demanded when Sylvie arrived this morning.
Dutifully, Sylvie paged, phoned, and E-mailed Leonardo Vetra.
Nothing.
So Kohler had left in a huff, apparently to go find Vetra himself. When he rolled back in a
few hours later, Kohler looked decidedly not well… not that he ever actually looked well , but he
looked worse than usual. He locked himself in his office, and she could hear him on his modem, his
phone, faxing, talking. Then Kohler rolled out again. He hadn’t been back since.
Sylvie had decided to ignore the antics as yet another Kohlerian melodrama, but she began to
get concerned when Kohler failed to return at the proper time for his daily injections; the director’s
physical condition required regular treatment, and when he decided to push his luck, the results
were never pretty–respiratory shock, coughing fits, and a mad dash by the infirmary personnel.
Sometimes Sylvie thought Maximilian Kohler had a death wish.
She considered paging him to remind him, but she’d learned charity was something Kohlers’s
pride despised. Last week, he had become so enraged with a visiting scientist who had shown him
undue pity that Kohler clambered to his feet and threw a clipboard at the man’s head. King Kohler
could be surprisingly agile when he was pissé .
At the moment, however, Sylvie’s concern for the director’s health was taking a back
burner… replaced by a much more pressing dilemma. The CERN switchboard had phoned five
minutes ago in a frenzy to say they had an urgent call for the director.
“He’s not available,” Sylvie had said.
Then the CERN operator told her who was calling.
Sylvie half laughed aloud. “You’re kidding, right?” She listened, and her face clouded with
disbelief. “And your caller ID confirms–” Sylvie was frowning. “I see. Okay. Can you ask what
the–” She sighed. “No. That’s fine. Tell him to hold. I’ll locate the director right away. Yes, I
understand. I’ll hurry.”
But Sylvie had not been able to find the director. She had called his cell line three times and
each time gotten the same message: “The mobile customer you are trying to reach is out of range.”
Out of range? How far could he go? So Sylvie had dialed Kohler’s beeper. Twice. No response.
Most unlike him. She’d even E-mailed his mobile computer. Nothing. It was like the man had
disappeared off the face of the earth.
So what do I do? she now wondered.
Short of searching CERN’s entire complex herself, Sylvie knew there was only one other way
to get the director’s attention. He would not be pleased, but the man on the phone was not someone
the director should keep waiting. Nor did it sound like the caller was in any mood to be told the
director was unavailable.
Startled with her own boldness, Sylvie made her decision. She walked into Kohler’s office
and went to the metal box on his wall behind his desk. She opened the cover, stared at the controls,
and found the correct button.
Then she took a deep breath and grabbed the microphone.
29
Vittoria did not remember how they had gotten to the main elevator, but they were there.
Ascending. Kohler was behind her, his breathing labored now. Langdon’s concerned gaze passed
through her like a ghost. He had taken the fax from her hand and slipped it in his jacket pocket
away from her sight, but the image was still burned into her memory.
As the elevator climbed, Vittoria’s world swirled into darkness. Papa! In her mind she
reached for him. For just a moment, in the oasis of her memory, Vittoria was with him. She was
nine years old, rolling down hills of edelweiss flowers, the Swiss sky spinning overhead.
Papa! Papa!
Leonardo Vetra was laughing beside her, beaming. “What is it, angel?”
“Papa!” she giggled, nuzzling close to him. “Ask me what’s the matter!”
“But you look happy, sweetie. Why would I ask you what’s the matter?”
“Just ask me.”
He shrugged. “What’s the matter?”
She immediately started laughing. “What’s the matter? Everything is the matter! Rocks!
Trees! Atoms! Even anteaters! Everything is the matter!”
He laughed. “Did you make that up?”
“Pretty smart, huh?”
“My little Einstein.”
She frowned. “He has stupid hair. I saw his picture.”
“He’s got a smart head, though. I told you what he proved, right?”
Her eyes widened with dread. “Dad! No! You promised !”
“E=MC2 !” He tickled her playfully. “E=MC2 !”
“No math ! I told you! I hate it!”
“I’m glad you hate it. Because girls aren’t even allowed to do math.”
Vittoria stopped short. “They aren’t ?”
“Of course not. Everyone knows that. Girls play with dollies. Boys do math. No math for
girls. I’m not even permitted to talk to little girls about math.”
“What! But that’s not fair!”
“Rules are rules. Absolutely no math for little girls.”
Vittoria looked horrified. “But dolls are boring!”
“I’m sorry,” her father said. “I could tell you about math, but if I got caught…” He looked
nervously around the deserted hills.
Vittoria followed his gaze. “Okay,” she whispered, “just tell me quietly.”
The motion of the elevator startled her. Vittoria opened her eyes. He was gone.
Reality rushed in, wrapping a frosty grip around her. She looked to Langdon. The earnest
concern in his gaze felt like the warmth of a guardian angel, especially in the aura of Kohler’s chill.
A single sentient thought began pounding at Vittoria with unrelenting force.
Where is the antimatter?
The horrifying answer was only a moment away.
30
“Maximilian Kohler. Kindly call your office immediately .”
Blazing sunbeams flooded Langdon’s eyes as the elevator doors opened into the main atrium.
Before the echo of the announcement on the intercom overhead faded, every electronic device on
Kohler’s wheelchair started beeping and buzzing simultaneously. His pager. His phone. His E-mail.
Kohler glanced down at the blinking lights in apparent bewilderment. The director had resurfaced,
and he was back in range.
“Director Kohler. Please call your office .”
The sound of his name on the PA seemed to startle Kohler.
He glanced up, looking angered and then almost immediately concerned. Langdon’s eyes met
his, and Vittoria’s too. The three of them were motionless a moment, as if all the tension between
them had been erased and replaced by a single, unifying foreboding.
Kohler took his cell phone from the armrest. He dialed an extension and fought off another
coughing fit. Vittoria and Langdon waited.
“This is… Director Kohler,” he said, wheezing. “Yes? I was subterranean, out of range.” He
listened, his gray eyes widening. “Who? Yes, patch it through.” There was a pause. “Hello? This
is Maximilian Kohler. I am the director of CERN. With whom am I speaking?”
Vittoria and Langdon watched in silence as Kohler listened.
“It would be unwise,” Kohler finally said, “to speak of this by phone. I will be there
immediately.” He was coughing again. “Meet me… at Leonardo da Vinci Airport. Forty minutes.”
Kohler’s breath seemed to be failing him now. He descended into a fit of coughing and barely
managed to choke out the words, “Locate the canister immediately… I am coming.” Then he
clicked off his phone.
Vittoria ran to Kohler’s side, but Kohler could no longer speak. Langdon watched as Vittoria
pulled out her cell phone and paged CERN’s infirmary. Langdon felt like a ship on the periphery of
a storm… tossed but detached.
Meet me at Leonardo da Vinci Airport . Kohler’s words echoed.
The uncertain shadows that had fogged Langdon’s mind all morning, in a single instant,
solidified into a vivid image. As he stood there in the swirl of confusion, he felt a door inside him
open… as if some mystic threshold had just been breached. The ambigram. The murdered
priest/scientist. The antimatter. And now… the target . Leonardo da Vinci Airport could only mean
one thing. In a moment of stark realization, Langdon knew he had just crossed over. He had become
a believer.
Five kilotons. Let there be light .
Two paramedics materialized, racing across the atrium in white smocks. They knelt by
Kohler, putting an oxygen mask on his face. Scientists in the hall stopped and stood back.
Kohler took two long pulls, pushed the mask aside, and still gasping for air, looked up at
Vittoria and Langdon. “Rome.”
“Rome?” Vittoria demanded. “The antimatter is in Rome? Who called?”
Kohler’s face was twisted, his gray eyes watering. “The Swiss…” He choked on the words,
and the paramedics put the mask back over his face. As they prepared to take him away, Kohler
reached up and grabbed Langdon’s arm.
Langdon nodded. He knew.
“Go…” Kohler wheezed beneath his mask. “Go… call me…” Then the paramedics were
rolling him away.
Vittoria stood riveted to the floor, watching him go. Then she turned to Langdon. “Rome?
But… what was that about the Swiss ?”
Langdon put a hand on her shoulder, barely whispering the words. “The Swiss Guard,” he
said. “The sworn sentinels of Vatican City.”
31
The X-33 space plane roared into the sky and arched south toward Rome. On board, Langdon
sat in silence. The last fifteen minutes had been a blur. Now that he had finished briefing Vittoria on
the Illuminati and their covenant against the Vatican, the scope of this situation was starting to sink
in.
What the hell am I doing? Langdon wondered. I should have gone home when I had the
chance! Deep down, though, he knew he’d never had the chance.
Langdon’s better judgment had screamed at him to return to Boston. Nonetheless, academic
astonishment had somehow vetoed prudence. Everything he had ever believed about the demise of
the Illuminati was suddenly looking like a brilliant sham. Part of him craved proof. Confirmation.
There was also a question of conscience. With Kohler ailing and Vittoria on her own, Langdon
knew that if his knowledge of the Illuminati could assist in any way, he had a moral obligation to be
here.
There was more, though. Although Langdon was ashamed to admit it, his initial horror on
hearing about the antimatter’s location was not only the danger to human life in Vatican City, but
for something else as well.
Art .
The world’s largest art collection was now sitting on a time bomb. The Vatican Museum
housed over 60,000 priceless pieces in 1,407 rooms–Michelangelo, da Vinci, Bernini, Botticelli.
Langdon wondered if all of the art could possibly be evacuated if necessary. He knew it was
impossible. Many of the pieces were sculptures weighing tons. Not to mention, the greatest
treasures were architectural–the Sistine Chapel, St. Peter’s Basilica, Michelangelo’s famed spiral
staircase leading to the Musèo Vaticano –priceless testaments to man’s creative genius. Langdon
wondered how much time was left on the canister.
“Thanks for coming,” Vittoria said, her voice quiet.
Langdon emerged from his daydream and looked up. Vittoria was sitting across the aisle.
Even in the stark fluorescent light of the cabin, there was an aura of composure about her–an almost
magnetic radiance of wholeness. Her breathing seemed deeper now, as if a spark of
self-preservation had ignited within her… a craving for justice and retribution, fueled by a
daughter’s love.
Vittoria had not had time to change from her shorts and sleeveless top, and her tawny legs
were now goose-bumped in the cold of the plane. Instinctively Langdon removed his jacket and
offered it to her.
“American chivalry?” She accepted, her eyes thanking him silently.
The plane jostled across some turbulence, and Langdon felt a surge of danger. The
windowless cabin felt cramped again, and he tried to imagine himself in an open field. The notion,
he realized, was ironic. He had been in an open field when it had happened. Crushing darkness . He
pushed the memory from his mind. Ancient history .
Vittoria was watching him. “Do you believe in God, Mr. Langdon?”
The question startled him. The earnestness in Vittoria’s voice was even more disarming than
the inquiry. Do I believe in God? He had hoped for a lighter topic of conversation to pass the trip.
A spiritual conundrum , Langdon thought. That’s what my friends call me . Although he
studied religion for years, Langdon was not a religious man. He respected the power of faith, the
benevolence of churches, the strength religion gave to many people… and yet, for him, the
intellectual suspension of disbelief that was imperative if one were truly going to “believe” had
always proved too big an obstacle for his academic mind. “I want to believe,” he heard himself
say.
Vittoria’s reply carried no judgment or challenge. “So why don’t you?”
He chuckled. “Well, it’s not that easy. Having faith requires leaps of faith, cerebral
acceptance of miracles–immaculate conceptions and divine interventions. And then there are the
codes of conduct. The Bible, the Koran, Buddhist scripture… they all carry similar
requirements–and similar penalties. They claim that if I don’t live by a specific code I will go to
hell. I can’t imagine a God who would rule that way.”
“I hope you don’t let your students dodge questions that shamelessly.”
The comment caught him off guard. “What?”
“Mr. Langdon, I did not ask if you believe what man says about God. I asked if you believed
in God. There is a difference. Holy scripture is stories… legends and history of man’s quest to
understand his own need for meaning. I am not asking you to pass judgment on literature. I am
asking if you believe in God . When you lie out under the stars, do you sense the divine? Do you
feel in your gut that you are staring up at the work of God’s hand?”
Langdon took a long moment to consider it.
“I’m prying,” Vittoria apologized.
“No, I just…”
“Certainly you must debate issues of faith with your classes.”
“Endlessly.”
“And you play devil’s advocate, I imagine. Always fueling the debate.”
Langdon smiled. “You must be a teacher too.”
“No, but I learned from a master. My father could argue two sides of a Möbius Strip.”
Langdon laughed, picturing the artful crafting of a Möbius Strip–a twisted ring of paper,
which technically possessed only one side. Langdon had first seen the single-sided shape in the
artwork of M. C. Escher. “May I ask you a question, Ms. Vetra?”
“Call me Vittoria. Ms. Vetra makes me feel old.”
He sighed inwardly, suddenly sensing his own age. “Vittoria, I’m Robert.”
“You had a question.”
“Yes. As a scientist and the daughter of a Catholic priest, what do you think of religion?”
Vittoria paused, brushing a lock of hair from her eyes. “Religion is like language or dress. We
gravitate toward the practices with which we were raised. In the end, though, we are all proclaiming
the same thing. That life has meaning. That we are grateful for the power that created us.”
Langdon was intrigued. “So you’re saying that whether you are a Christian or a Muslim
simply depends on where you were born?”
“Isn’t it obvious? Look at the diffusion of religion around the globe.”
“So faith is random?”
“Hardly. Faith is universal. Our specific methods for understanding it are arbitrary. Some of
us pray to Jesus, some of us go to Mecca, some of us study subatomic particles. In the end we are
all just searching for truth, that which is greater than ourselves.”
Langdon wished his students could express themselves so clearly. Hell, he wished he could
express himself so clearly. “And God?” he asked. “Do you believe in God?”
Vittoria was silent for a long time. “Science tells me God must exist. My mind tells me I will
never understand God. And my heart tells me I am not meant to.”
How’s that for concise , he thought. “So you believe God is fact, but we will never understand
Him.”
“Her ,” she said with a smile. “Your Native Americans had it right.”
Langdon chuckled. “Mother Earth.”
“Gaea . The planet is an organism. All of us are cells with different purposes. And yet we are
intertwined. Serving each other. Serving the whole.”
Looking at her, Langdon felt something stir within him that he had not felt in a long time.
There was a bewitching clarity in her eyes… a purity in her voice. He felt drawn.
“Mr. Langdon, let me ask you another question.”
“Robert,” he said. Mr. Langdon makes me feel old. I am old!
“If you don’t mind my asking, Robert, how did you get involved with the Illuminati?”
Langdon thought back. “Actually, it was money.”
Vittoria looked disappointed. “Money? Consulting, you mean?”
Langdon laughed, realizing how it must have sounded. “No. Money as in currency .” He
reached in his pants pocket and pulled out some money. He found a one-dollar bill. “I became
fascinated with the cult when I first learned that U.S. currency is covered with Illuminati
symbology.”
Vittoria’s eyes narrowed, apparently not knowing whether or not to take him seriously.
Langdon handed her the bill. “Look at the back. See the Great Seal on the left?”
Vittoria turned the one-dollar bill over. “You mean the pyramid?”
“The pyramid. Do you know what pyramids have to do with U.S. history?”
Vittoria shrugged.
“Exactly,” Langdon said. “Absolutely nothing .”
Vittoria frowned. “So why is it the central symbol of your Great Seal?”
“An eerie bit of history,” Langdon said. “The pyramid is an occult symbol representing a
convergence upward, toward the ultimate source of Illumination. See what’s above it?”
Vittoria studied the bill. “An eye inside a triangle.”
“It’s called the trinacria . Have you ever seen that eye in a triangle anywhere else?”
Vittoria was silent a moment. “Actually, yes, but I’m not sure…”
“It’s emblazoned on Masonic lodges around the world.”
“The symbol is Masonic?”
“Actually, no. It’s Illuminati. They called it their ‘shining delta.’ A call for enlightened
change. The eye signifies the Illuminati’s ability to infiltrate and watch all things. The shining
triangle represents enlightenment. And the triangle is also the Greek letter delta, which is the
mathematical symbol for–”
“Change. Transition.”
Langdon smiled. “I forgot I was talking to a scientist.”
“So you’re saying the U.S. Great Seal is a call for enlightened, all-seeing change?”
“Some would call it a New World Order.”
Vittoria seemed startled. She glanced down at the bill again. “The writing under the pyramid
says Novus … Ordo …”
“Novus Ordo Seculorum ,” Langdon said. “It means New Secular Order.”
“Secular as in non religious?”
“Nonreligious. The phrase not only clearly states the Illuminati objective, but it also blatantly
contradicts the phrase beside it. In God We Trust .”
Vittoria seemed troubled. “But how could all this symbology end up on the most powerful
currency in the world?”
“Most academics believe it was through Vice President Henry Wallace. He was an upper
echelon Mason and certainly had ties to the Illuminati. Whether it was as a member or innocently
under their influence, nobody knows. But it was Wallace who sold the design of the Great Seal to
the president.”
“How? Why would the president have agreed to–”
“The president was Franklin D. Roosevelt. Wallace simply told him Novus Ordo Seculorum
meant New Deal .”
Vittoria seemed skeptical. “And Roosevelt didn’t have anyone else look at the symbol before
telling the Treasury to print it?”
“No need. He and Wallace were like brothers.”
“Brothers?”
“Check your history books,” Langdon said with a smile. “Franklin D. Roosevelt was a
well-known Mason.”
32
Langdon held his breath as the X-33 spiraled into Rome’s Leonardo da Vinci International
Airport. Vittoria sat across from him, eyes closed as if trying to will the situation into control. The
craft touched down and taxied to a private hangar.
“Sorry for the slow flight,” the pilot apologized, emerging from the cockpit. “Had to trim her
back. Noise regulations over populated areas.”
Langdon checked his watch. They had been airborne thirty-seven minutes.
The pilot popped the outer door. “Anybody want to tell me what’s going on?”
Neither Vittoria nor Langdon responded.
“Fine,” he said, stretching. “I’ll be in the cockpit with the air-conditioning and my music. Just
me and Garth.”
The late-afternoon sun blazed outside the hangar. Langdon carried his tweed jacket over his
shoulder. Vittoria turned her face skyward and inhaled deeply, as if the sun’s rays somehow
transferred to her some mystical replenishing energy.
Mediterraneans , Langdon mused, already sweating.
“Little old for cartoons, aren’t you?” Vittoria asked, without opening her eyes.
“I’m sorry?”
“Your wristwatch. I saw it on the plane.”
Langdon flushed slightly. He was accustomed to having to defend his timepiece. The
collector’s edition Mickey Mouse watch had been a childhood gift from his parents. Despite the
contorted foolishness of Mickey’s outstretched arms designating the hour, it was the only watch
Langdon had ever worn. Waterproof and glow-in-the-dark, it was perfect for swimming laps or
walking unlit college paths at night. When Langdon’s students questioned his fashion sense, he told
them he wore Mickey as a daily reminder to stay young at heart.
“It’s six o’clock,” he said.
Vittoria nodded, eyes still closed. “I think our ride’s here.”
Langdon heard the distant whine, looked up, and felt a sinking feeling. Approaching from the
north was a helicopter, slicing low across the runway. Langdon had been on a helicopter once in the
Andean Palpa Valley looking at the Nazca sand drawings and had not enjoyed it one bit. A flying
shoebox . After a morning of space plane rides, Langdon had hoped the Vatican would send a car.
Apparently not.
The chopper slowed overhead, hovered a moment, and dropped toward the runway in front of
them. The craft was white and carried a coat of arms emblazoned on the side–two skeleton keys
crossing a shield and papal crown. He knew the symbol well. It was the traditional seal of the
Vatican–the sacred symbol of the Holy See or “holy seat” of government, the seat being literally
the ancient throne of St. Peter.
The Holy Chopper , Langdon groaned, watching the craft land. He’d forgotten the Vatican
owned one of these things, used for transporting the Pope to the airport, to meetings, or to his
summer palace in Gandolfo. Langdon definitely would have preferred a car.
The pilot jumped from the cockpit and strode toward them across the tarmac.
Now it was Vittoria who looked uneasy. “That’s our pilot?”
Langdon shared her concern. “To fly, or not to fly. That is the question.”
The pilot looked like he was festooned for a Shakespearean melodrama. His puffy tunic was
vertically striped in brilliant blue and gold. He wore matching pantaloons and spats. On his feet
were black flats that looked like slippers. On top of it all, he wore a black felt beret.
“Traditional Swiss Guard uniforms,” Langdon explained. “Designed by Michelangelo
himself.” As the man drew closer, Langdon winced. “I admit, not one of Michelangelo’s better
efforts.”
Despite the man’s garish attire, Langdon could tell the pilot meant business. He moved
toward them with all the rigidity and dignity of a U.S. Marine. Langdon had read many times about
the rigorous requirements for becoming one of the elite Swiss Guard. Recruited from one of
Switzerland’s four Catholic cantons, applicants had to be Swiss males between nineteen and thirty
years old, at least 5 feet 6 inches, trained by the Swiss Army, and unmarried. This imperial corps
was envied by world governments as the most allegiant and deadly security force in the world.
“You are from CERN?” the guard asked, arriving before them. His voice was steely.
“Yes, sir,” Langdon replied.
“You made remarkable time,” he said, giving the X-33 a mystified stare. He turned to
Vittoria. “Ma’am, do you have any other clothing?”
“I beg your pardon?”
He motioned to her legs. “Short pants are not permitted inside Vatican City.”
Langdon glanced down at Vittoria’s legs and frowned. He had forgotten. Vatican City had a
strict ban on visible legs above the knee–both male and female. The regulation was a way of
showing respect for the sanctity of God’s city.
“This is all I have,” she said. “We came in a hurry.”
The guard nodded, clearly displeased. He turned next to Langdon. “Are you carrying any
weapons?”
Weapons? Langdon thought. I’m not even carrying a change of underwear! He shook his
head.
The officer crouched at Langdon’s feet and began patting him down, starting at his socks.
Trusting guy , Langdon thought. The guard’s strong hands moved up Langdon’s legs, coming
uncomfortably close to his groin. Finally they moved up to his chest and shoulders. Apparently
content Langdon was clean, the guard turned to Vittoria. He ran his eyes up her legs and torso.
Vittoria glared. “Don’t even think about it.”
The guard fixed Vittoria with a gaze clearly intended to intimidate. Vittoria did not flinch.
“What’s that?” the guard said, pointing to a faint square bulge in the front pocket of her
shorts.
Vittoria removed an ultrathin cell phone. The guard took it, clicked it on, waited for a dial
tone, and then, apparently satisfied that it was indeed nothing more than a phone, returned it to her.
Vittoria slid it back into her pocket.
“Turn around, please,” the guard said.
Vittoria obliged, holding her arms out and rotating a full 360 degrees.
The guard carefully studied her. Langdon had already decided that Vittoria’s form-fitting
shorts and blouse were not bulging anywhere they shouldn’t have been. Apparently the guard came
to the same conclusion.
“Thank you. This way please.”
The Swiss Guard chopper churned in neutral as Langdon and Vittoria approached. Vittoria
boarded first, like a seasoned pro, barely even stooping as she passed beneath the whirling rotors.
Langdon held back a moment.
“No chance of a car?” he yelled, half-joking to the Swiss Guard, who was climbing in the
pilot’s seat.
The man did not answer.
Langdon knew that with Rome’s maniacal drivers, flying was probably safer anyway. He took
a deep breath and boarded, stooping cautiously as he passed beneath the spinning rotors.
As the guard fired up the engines, Vittoria called out, “Have you located the canister?”
The guard glanced over his shoulder, looking confused. “The what?”
“The canister. You called CERN about a canister?”
The man shrugged. “No idea what you’re talking about. We’ve been very busy today. My
commander told me to pick you up. That’s all I know.”
Vittoria gave Langdon an unsettled look.
“Buckle up, please,” the pilot said as the engine revved.
Langdon reached for his seat belt and strapped himself in. The tiny fuselage seemed to shrink
around him. Then with a roar, the craft shot up and banked sharply north toward Rome.
Rome … the caput mundi , where Caesar once ruled, where St. Peter was crucified. The cradle
of modern civilization. And at its core… a ticking bomb.
33
Rome from the air is a labyrinth–an indecipherable maze of ancient roadways winding around
buildings, fountains, and crumbling ruins.
The Vatican chopper stayed low in the sky as it sliced northwest through the permanent smog
layer coughed up by the congestion below. Langdon gazed down at the mopeds, sight-seeing buses,
and armies of miniature Fiat sedans buzzing around rotaries in all directions. Koyaanisqatsi , he
thought, recalling the Hopi term for “life out of balance.”
Vittoria sat in silent determination in the seat beside him.
The chopper banked hard.
His stomach dropping, Langdon gazed farther into the distance. His eyes found the crumbling
ruins of the Roman Coliseum. The Coliseum, Langdon had always thought, was one of history’s
greatest ironies. Now a dignified symbol for the rise of human culture and civilization, the stadium
had been built to host centuries of barbaric events–hungry lions shredding prisoners, armies of
slaves battling to the death, gang rapes of exotic women captured from far-off lands, as well as
public beheadings and castrations. It was ironic, Langdon thought, or perhaps fitting, that the
Coliseum had served as the architectural blueprint for Harvard’s Soldier Field–the football stadium
where the ancient traditions of savagery were reenacted every fall… crazed fans screaming for
bloodshed as Harvard battled Yale.
As the chopper headed north, Langdon spied the Roman Forum–the heart of pre-Christian
Rome. The decaying columns looked like toppled gravestones in a cemetery that had somehow
avoided being swallowed by the metropolis surrounding it.
To the west the wide basin of the Tiber River wound enormous arcs across the city. Even
from the air Langdon could tell the water was deep. The churning currents were brown, filled with
silt and foam from heavy rains.
“Straight ahead,” the pilot said, climbing higher.
Langdon and Vittoria looked out and saw it. Like a mountain parting the morning fog, the
colossal dome rose out of the haze before them: St. Peter’s Basilica.
“Now that ,” Langdon said to Vittoria, “is something Michelangelo got right.”
Langdon had never seen St. Peter’s from the air. The marble façade blazed like fire in the
afternoon sun. Adorned with 140 statues of saints, martyrs, and angels, the Herculean edifice
stretched two football fields wide and a staggering six long. The cavernous interior of the basilica
had room for over 60,000 worshipers… over one hundred times the population of Vatican City, the
smallest country in the world.
Incredibly, though, not even a citadel of this magnitude could dwarf the piazza before it. A
sprawling expanse of granite, St. Peter’s Square was a staggering open space in the congestion of
Rome, like a classical Central Park. In front of the basilica, bordering the vast oval common, 284
columns swept outward in four concentric arcs of diminishing size… an architectural trompe de
l’oiel used to heighten the piazza’s sense of grandeur.
As he stared at the magnificent shrine before him, Langdon wondered what St. Peter would
think if he were here now. The Saint had died a gruesome death, crucified upside down on this very
spot. Now he rested in the most sacred of tombs, buried five stories down, directly beneath the
central cupola of the basilica.
“Vatican City,” the pilot said, sounding anything but welcoming.
Langdon looked out at the towering stone bastions that loomed ahead–impenetrable
fortifications surrounding the complex… a strangely earthly defense for a spiritual world of secrets,
power, and mystery.
“Look!” Vittoria said suddenly, grabbing Langdon’s arm. She motioned frantically downward
toward St. Peter’s Square directly beneath them. Langdon put his face to the window and looked.
“Over there,” she said, pointing.
Langdon looked. The rear of the piazza looked like a parking lot crowded with a dozen or so
trailer trucks. Huge satellite dishes pointed skyward from the roof of every truck. The dishes were
emblazoned with familiar names:
Televisor Europea
Video Italia
BBC
United Press International
Langdon felt suddenly confused, wondering if the news of the antimatter had already leaked
out.
Vittoria seemed suddenly tense. “Why is the press here? What’s going on?”
The pilot turned and gave her an odd look over his shoulder. “What’s going on? You don’t
know?”
“No,” she fired back, her accent husky and strong.
“Il Conclavo ,” he said. “It is to be sealed in about an hour. The whole world is watching.”
Il Conclavo .
The word rang a long moment in Langdon’s ears before dropping like a brick to the pit of his
stomach. Il Conclavo . The Vatican Conclave . How could he have forgotten? It had been in the
news recently.
Fifteen days ago, the Pope, after a tremendously popular twelve-year reign, had passed away.
Every paper in the world had carried the story about the Pope’s fatal stroke while sleeping–a sudden
and unexpected death many whispered was suspicious. But now, in keeping with the sacred
tradition, fifteen days after the death of a Pope, the Vatican was holding Il Conclavo –the sacred
ceremony in which the 165 cardinals of the world–the most powerful men in Christendom–gathered
in Vatican City to elect the new Pope.
Every cardinal on the planet is here today , Langdon thought as the chopper passed over St.
Peter’s Basilica. The expansive inner world of Vatican City spread out beneath him. The entire
power structure of the Roman Catholic Church is sitting on a time bomb .
34
Cardinal Mortati gazed up at the lavish ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and tried to find a
moment of quiet reflection. The frescoed walls echoed with the voices of cardinals from nations
around the globe. The men jostled in the candlelit tabernacle, whispering excitedly and consulting
with one another in numerous languages, the universal tongues being English, Italian, and Spanish.
The light in the chapel was usually sublime–long rays of tinted sun slicing through the
darkness like rays from heaven–but not today. As was the custom, all of the chapel’s windows had
been covered in black velvet in the name of secrecy. This ensured that no one on the inside could
send signals or communicate in any way with the outside world. The result was a profound darkness
lit only by candles… a shimmering radiance that seemed to purify everyone it touched, making
them all ghostly… like saints.
What privilege , Mortati thought, that I am to oversee this sanctified event . Cardinals over
eighty years of age were too old to be eligible for election and did not attend conclave, but at
seventy-nine years old, Mortati was the most senior cardinal here and had been appointed to oversee
the proceedings.
Following tradition, the cardinals gathered here two hours before conclave to catch up with
friends and engage in last-minute discussion. At 7 P.M., the late Pope’s chamberlain would arrive,
give opening prayer, and then leave. Then the Swiss Guard would seal the doors and lock all the
cardinals inside. It was then that the oldest and most secretive political ritual in the world would
begin. The cardinals would not be released until they decided who among them would be the next
Pope.
Conclave. Even the name was secretive. “Con clave” literally meant “locked with a key.” The
cardinals were permitted no contact whatsoever with the outside world. No phone calls. No
messages. No whispers through doorways. Conclave was a vacuum, not to be influenced by
anything in the outside world. This would ensure that the cardinals kept Solum Dum prae oculis …
only God before their eyes.
Outside the walls of the chapel, of course, the media watched and waited, speculating as to
which of the cardinals would become the ruler of one billion Catholics worldwide. Conclaves
created an intense, politically charged atmosphere, and over the centuries they had turned deadly:
poisonings, fist fights, and even murder had erupted within the sacred walls. Ancient history ,
Mortati thought. Tonight’s conclave will be unified, blissful, and above all … brief .
Or at least that had been his speculation.
Now, however, an unexpected development had emerged. Mystifyingly, four cardinals were
absent from the chapel. Mortati knew that all the exits to Vatican City were guarded, and the
missing cardinals could not have gone far, but still, with less than an hour before opening prayer, he
was feeling disconcerted. After all, the four missing men were no ordinary cardinals. They were
the cardinals.
The chosen four.
As overseer of the conclave, Mortati had already sent word through the proper channels to the
Swiss Guard alerting them to the cardinals’ absence. He had yet to hear back. Other cardinals had
now noticed the puzzling absence. The anxious whispers had begun. Of all cardinals, these four
should be on time! Cardinal Mortati was starting to fear it might be a long evening after all.
He had no idea.
35
The Vatican’s helipad, for reasons of safety and noise control, is located in the northwest tip
of Vatican City, as far from St. Peter’s Basilica as possible.
“Terra firma ,” the pilot announced as they touched down. He exited and opened the sliding
door for Langdon and Vittoria.
Langdon descended from the craft and turned to help Vittoria, but she had already dropped
effortlessly to the ground. Every muscle in her body seemed tuned to one objective–finding the
antimatter before it left a horrific legacy.
After stretching a reflective sun tarp across the cockpit window, the pilot ushered them to an
oversized electric golf cart waiting near the helipad. The cart whisked them silently alongside the
country’s western border–a fifty-foot-tall cement bulwark thick enough to ward off attacks even by
tanks. Lining the interior of the wall, posted at fifty-meter intervals, Swiss Guards stood at
attention, surveying the interior of the grounds. The cart turned sharply right onto Via della
Osservatorio. Signs pointed in all directions:
Palazzio Governatorio
Collegio Ethiopiana
Basilica San Pietro
Capella Sistina
They accelerated up the manicured road past a squat building marked Radio Vaticana . This,
Langdon realized to his amazement, was the hub of the world’s most listened-to radio
programming–Radio Vaticana –spreading the word of God to millions of listeners around the globe.
“Attenzione ,” the pilot said, turning sharply into a rotary.
As the cart wound round, Langdon could barely believe the sight now coming into view.
Giardini Vaticani , he thought. The heart of Vatican City. Directly ahead rose the rear of St. Peter’s
Basilica, a view, Langdon realized, most people never saw. To the right loomed the Palace of the
Tribunal, the lush papal residence rivaled only by Versailles in its baroque embellishment. The
severe-looking Governatorato building was now behind them, housing Vatican City’s
administration. And up ahead on the left, the massive rectangular edifice of the Vatican Museum.
Langdon knew there would be no time for a museum visit this trip.
“Where is everyone?” Vittoria asked, surveying the deserted lawns and walkways.
The guard checked his black, military-style chronograph–an odd anachronism beneath his
puffy sleeve. “The cardinals are convened in the Sistine Chapel. Conclave begins in a little under an
hour.”
Langdon nodded, vaguely recalling that before conclave the cardinals spent two hours inside
the Sistine Chapel in quiet reflection and visitations with their fellow cardinals from around the
globe. The time was meant to renew old friendships among the cardinals and facilitate a less heated
election process. “And the rest of the residents and staff?”
“Banned from the city for secrecy and security until the conclave concludes.”
“And when does it conclude?”
The guard shrugged. “God only knows.” The words sounded oddly literal.
After parking the cart on the wide lawn directly behind St. Peter’s Basilica, the guard escorted
Langdon and Vittoria up a stone escarpment to a marble plaza off the back of the basilica. Crossing
the plaza, they approached the rear wall of the basilica and followed it through a triangular
courtyard, across Via Belvedere, and into a series of buildings closely huddled together. Langdon’s
art history had taught him enough Italian to pick out signs for the Vatican Printing Office, the
Tapestry Restoration Lab, Post Office Management, and the Church of St. Ann. They crossed
another small square and arrived at their destination.
The Office of the Swiss Guard is housed adjacent to Il Corpo di Vigilanza, directly northeast
of St. Peter’s Basilica. The office is a squat, stone building. On either side of the entrance, like two
stone statues, stood a pair of guards.
Langdon had to admit, these guards did not look quite so comical. Although they also wore
the blue and gold uniform, each wielded the traditional “Vatican long sword”–an eight-foot spear
with a razor-sharp scythe–rumored to have decapitated countless Muslims while defending the
Christian crusaders in the fifteenth century.
As Langdon and Vittoria approached, the two guards stepped forward, crossing their long
swords, blocking the entrance. One looked up at the pilot in confusion. “I pantaloni ,” he said,
motioning to Vittoria’s shorts.
The pilot waved them off. “Il comandante vuole vederli subito .”
The guards frowned. Reluctantly they stepped aside.
Inside, the air was cool. It looked nothing like the administrative security offices Langdon
would have imagined. Ornate and impeccably furnished, the hallways contained paintings Langdon
was certain any museum worldwide would gladly have featured in its main gallery.
The pilot pointed down a steep set of stairs. “Down, please.”
Langdon and Vittoria followed the white marble treads as they descended between a gauntlet
of nude male sculptures. Each statue wore a fig leaf that was lighter in color than the rest of the
body.
The Great Castration , Langdon thought.
It was one of the most horrific tragedies in Renaissance art. In 1857, Pope Pius IX decided
that the accurate representation of the male form might incite lust inside the Vatican. So he got a
chisel and mallet and hacked off the genitalia of every single male statue inside Vatican City. He
defaced works by Michelangelo, Bramante, and Bernini. Plaster fig leaves were used to patch the
damage. Hundreds of sculptures had been emasculated. Langdon had often wondered if there was a
huge crate of stone penises someplace.
“Here,” the guard announced.
They reached the bottom of the stairs and dead-ended at a heavy, steel door. The guard typed
an entry code, and the door slid open. Langdon and Vittoria entered.
Beyond the threshold was absolute mayhem.
36
The Office of the Swiss Guard.
Langdon stood in the doorway, surveying the collision of centuries before them. Mixed media
. The room was a lushly adorned Renaissance library complete with inlaid bookshelves, oriental
carpets, and colorful tapestries… and yet the room bristled with high-tech gear–banks of computers,
faxes, electronic maps of the Vatican complex, and televisions tuned to CNN. Men in colorful
pantaloons typed feverishly on computers and listened intently in futuristic headphones.
“Wait here,” the guard said.
Langdon and Vittoria waited as the guard crossed the room to an exceptionally tall, wiry man
in a dark blue military uniform. He was talking on a cellular phone and stood so straight he was
almost bent backward. The guard said something to him, and the man shot a glance over at Langdon
and Vittoria. He nodded, then turned his back on them and continued his phone call.
The guard returned. “Commander Olivetti will be with you in a moment.”
“Thank you.”
The guard left and headed back up the stairs.
Langdon studied Commander Olivetti across the room, realizing he was actually the
Commander in Chief of the armed forces of an entire country. Vittoria and Langdon waited,
observing the action before them. Brightly dressed guards bustled about yelling orders in Italian.
“Continua cercando!” one yelled into a telephone.
“Probasti il musèo?” another asked.
Langdon did not need fluent Italian to discern that the security center was currently in intense
search mode. This was the good news. The bad news was that they obviously had not yet found the
antimatter.
“You okay?” Langdon asked Vittoria.
She shrugged, offering a tired smile.
When the commander finally clicked off his phone and approached across the room, he
seemed to grow with each step. Langdon was tall himself and not accustomed to looking up at many
people, but Commander Olivetti demanded it. Langdon sensed immediately that the commander
was a man who had weathered tempests, his face hale and steeled. His dark hair was cropped in a
military buzz cut, and his eyes burned with the kind of hardened determination only attainable
through years of intense training. He moved with ramrod exactness, the earpiece hidden discreetly
behind one ear making him look more like U.S. Secret Service than Swiss Guard.
The commander addressed them in accented English. His voice was startlingly quiet for such
a large man, barely a whisper. It bit with a tight, military efficiency. “Good afternoon,” he said. “I
am Commander Olivetti–Comandante Principale of the Swiss Guard. I’m the one who called your
director.”
Vittoria gazed upward. “Thank you for seeing us, sir.”
The commander did not respond. He motioned for them to follow and led them through the
tangle of electronics to a door in the side wall of the chamber. “Enter,” he said, holding the door for
them.
Langdon and Vittoria walked through and found themselves in a darkened control room
where a wall of video monitors was cycling lazily through a series of black-and-white images of the
complex. A young guard sat watching the images intently.
“Fuori ,” Olivetti said.
The guard packed up and left.
Olivetti walked over to one of the screens and pointed to it. Then he turned toward his guests.
“This image is from a remote camera hidden somewhere inside Vatican City. I’d like an
explanation.”
Langdon and Vittoria looked at the screen and inhaled in unison. The image was absolute. No
doubt. It was CERN’s antimatter canister. Inside, a shimmering droplet of metallic liquid hung
ominously in the air, lit by the rhythmic blinking of the LED digital clock. Eerily, the area around
the canister was almost entirely dark, as if the antimatter were in a closet or darkened room. At the
top of the monitor flashed superimposed text: Live Feed–Camera #86 .
Vittoria looked at the time remaining on the flashing indicator on the canister. “Under six
hours,” she whispered to Langdon, her face tense.
Langdon checked his watch. “So we have until…” He stopped, a knot tightening in his
stomach.
“Midnight,” Vittoria said, with a withering look.
Midnight , Langdon thought. A flair for the dramatic . Apparently whoever stole the canister
last night had timed it perfectly. A stark foreboding set in as he realized he was currently sitting at
ground zero.
Olivetti’s whisper now sounded more like a hiss. “Does this object belong to your facility?”
Vittoria nodded. “Yes, sir. It was stolen from us. It contains an extremely combustible
substance called antimatter.”
Olivetti looked unmoved. “I am quite familiar with incendiaries, Ms. Vetra. I have not heard
of antimatter.”
“It’s new technology. We need to locate it immediately or evacuate Vatican City.”
Olivetti closed his eyes slowly and reopened them, as if refocusing on Vittoria might change
what he just heard. “Evacuate? Are you aware what is going on here this evening?”
“Yes, sir. And the lives of your cardinals are in danger. We have about six hours. Have you
made any headway locating the canister?”
Olivetti shook his head. “We haven’t started looking.”
Vittoria choked. “What? But we expressly heard your guards talking about searching the–”
“Searching, yes,” Olivetti said, “but not for your canister. My men are looking for something
else that does not concern you.”
Vittoria’s voice cracked. “You haven’t even begun looking for this canister?”
Olivetti’s pupils seemed to recede into his head. He had the passionless look of an insect.
“Ms. Vetra, is it? Let me explain something to you. The director of your facility refused to share
any details about this object with me over the phone except to say that I needed to find it
immediately. We are exceptionally busy, and I do not have the luxury of dedicating manpower to a
situation until I get some facts.”
“There is only one relevant fact at this moment, sir,” Vittoria said, “that being that in six
hours that device is going to vaporize this entire complex.”
Olivetti stood motionless. “Ms. Vetra, there is something you need to know.” His tone hinted
at patronizing. “Despite the archaic appearance of Vatican City, every single entrance, both public
and private, is equipped with the most advanced sensing equipment known to man. If someone tried
to enter with any sort of incendiary device it would be detected instantly. We have radioactive
isotope scanners, olfactory filters designed by the American DEA to detect the faintest chemical
signatures of combustibles and toxins. We also use the most advanced metal detectors and X-ray
scanners available.”
“Very impressive,” Vittoria said, matching Olivetti’s cool. “Unfortunately, antimatter is
nonradioactive, its chemical signature is that of pure hydrogen, and the canister is plastic. None of
those devices would have detected it.”
“But the device has an energy source,” Olivetti said, motioning to the blinking LED. “Even
the smallest trace of nickel-cadmium would register as–”
“The batteries are also plastic.”
Olivetti’s patience was clearly starting to wane. “Plastic batteries?”
“Polymer gel electrolyte with Teflon.”
Olivetti leaned toward her, as if to accentuate his height advantage. “Signorina , the Vatican
is the target of dozens of bomb threats a month. I personally train every Swiss Guard in modern
explosive technology. I am well aware that there is no substance on earth powerful enough to do
what you are describing unless you are talking about a nuclear warhead with a fuel core the size of a
baseball.”
Vittoria framed him with a fervent stare. “Nature has many mysteries yet to unveil.”
Olivetti leaned closer. “Might I ask exactly who you are? What is your position at CERN?”
“I am a senior member of the research staff and appointed liaison to the Vatican for this
crisis.”
“Excuse me for being rude, but if this is indeed a crisis , why am I dealing with you and not
your director? And what disrespect do you intend by coming into Vatican City in short pants?”
Langdon groaned. He couldn’t believe that under the circumstances the man was being a
stickler for dress code. Then again, he realized, if stone penises could induce lustful thoughts in
Vatican residents, Vittoria Vetra in shorts could certainly be a threat to national security.
“Commander Olivetti,” Langdon intervened, trying to diffuse what looked like a second bomb
about to explode. “My name is Robert Langdon. I’m a professor of religious studies in the U.S. and
unaffiliated with CERN. I have seen an antimatter demonstration and will vouch for Ms. Vetra’s
claim that it is exceptionally dangerous. We have reason to believe it was placed inside your
complex by an antireligious cult hoping to disrupt your conclave.”
Olivetti turned, peering down at Langdon. “I have a woman in shorts telling me that a droplet
of liquid is going to blow up Vatican City, and I have an American professor telling me we are
being targeted by some antireligious cult. What exactly is it you expect me to do?”
“Find the canister,” Vittoria said. “Right away.”
“Impossible. That device could be anywhere. Vatican City is enormous.”
“Your cameras don’t have GPS locators on them?”
“They are not generally stolen . This missing camera will take days to locate.”
“We don’t have days ,” Vittoria said adamantly. “We have six hours.”
“Six hours until what, Ms. Vetra?” Olivetti’s voice grew louder suddenly. He pointed to the
image on the screen. “Until these numbers count down? Until Vatican City disappears? Believe me,
I do not take kindly to people tampering with my security system. Nor do I like mechanical
contraptions appearing mysteriously inside my walls. I am concerned. It is my job to be
concerned. But what you have told me here is unacceptable.”
Langdon spoke before he could stop himself. “Have you heard of the Illuminati?”
The commander’s icy exterior cracked. His eyes went white, like a shark about to attack. “I
am warning you. I do not have time for this.”
“So you have heard of the Illuminati?”
Olivetti’s eyes stabbed like bayonets. “I am a sworn defendant of the Catholic Church. Of
course I have heard of the Illuminati. They have been dead for decades.”
Langdon reached in his pocket and pulled out the fax image of Leonardo Vetra’s branded
body. He handed it to Olivetti.
“I am an Illuminati scholar,” Langdon said as Olivetti studied the picture. “I am having a
difficult time accepting that the Illuminati are still active, and yet the appearance of this brand
combined with the fact that the Illuminati have a well-known covenant against Vatican City has
changed my mind.”
“A computer-generated hoax.” Olivetti handed the fax back to Langdon.
Langdon stared, incredulous. “Hoax? Look at the symmetry! You of all people should realize
the authenticity of–”
“Authenticity is precisely what you lack. Perhaps Ms. Vetra has not informed you, but CERN
scientists have been criticizing Vatican policies for decades. They regularly petition us for retraction
of Creationist theory, formal apologies for Galileo and Copernicus, repeal of our criticism against
dangerous or immoral research. What scenario seems more likely to you–that a
four-hundred-year-old satanic cult has resurfaced with an advanced weapon of mass destruction, or
that some prankster at CERN is trying to disrupt a sacred Vatican event with a well-executed
fraud?”
“That photo,” Vittoria said, her voice like boiling lava, “is of my father. Murdered . You think
this is my idea of a joke ?”
“I don’t know, Ms. Vetra. But I do know until I get some answers that make sense , there is
no way I will raise any sort of alarm. Vigilance and discretion are my duty… such that spiritual
matters can take place here with clarity of mind. Today of all days.”
Langdon said, “At least postpone the event.”
“Postpone?” Olivetti’s jaw dropped. “Such arrogance! A conclave is not some American
baseball game you call on account of rain. This is a sacred event with a strict code and process.
Never mind that one billion Catholics in the world are waiting for a leader. Never mind that the
world media is outside. The protocols for this event are holy–not subject to modification. Since
1179, conclaves have survived earthquakes, famines, and even the plague. Believe me, it is not
about to be canceled on account of a murdered scientist and a droplet of God knows what.”
“Take me to the person in charge,” Vittoria demanded.
Olivetti glared. “You’ve got him.”
“No,” she said. “Someone in the clergy .”
The veins on Olivetti’s brow began to show. “The clergy has gone. With the exception of the
Swiss Guard, the only ones present in Vatican City at this time are the College of Cardinals. And
they are inside the Sistine Chapel.”
“How about the chamberlain ?” Langdon stated flatly.
“Who?”
“The late Pope’s chamberlain .” Langdon repeated the word self-assuredly, praying his
memory served him. He recalled reading once about the curious arrangement of Vatican authority
following the death of a Pope. If Langdon was correct, during the interim between Popes, complete
autonomous power shifted temporarily to the late Pope’s personal assistant–his chamberlain–a
secretarial underling who oversaw conclave until the cardinals chose the new Holy Father. “I
believe the chamberlain is the man in charge at the moment.”
“Il camerlegno?” Olivetti scowled. “The camerlegno is only a priest here. He is not even
canonized. He is the late Pope’s hand servant.”
“But he is here. And you answer to him.”
Olivetti crossed his arms. “Mr. Langdon, it is true that Vatican rule dictates the camerlegno
assume chief executive office during conclave, but it is only because his lack of eligibility for the
papacy ensures an unbiased election. It is as if your president died, and one of his aides temporarily
sat in the oval office. The camerlegno is young, and his understanding of security, or anything else
for that matter, is extremely limited. For all intents and purposes, I am in charge here.”
“Take us to him,” Vittoria said.
“Impossible. Conclave begins in forty minutes. The camerlegno is in the Office of the Pope
preparing. I have no intention of disturbing him with matters of security.”
Vittoria opened her mouth to respond but was interrupted by a knocking at the door. Olivetti
opened it.
A guard in full regalia stood outside, pointing to his watch. “Éé l’ora, comandante .”
Olivetti checked his own watch and nodded. He turned back to Langdon and Vittoria like a
judge pondering their fate. “Follow me.” He led them out of the monitoring room across the
security center to a small clear cubicle against the rear wall. “My office.” Olivetti ushered them
inside. The room was unspecial–a cluttered desk, file cabinets, folding chairs, a water cooler. “I will
be back in ten minutes. I suggest you use the time to decide how you would like to proceed.”
Vittoria wheeled. “You can’t just leave! That canister is–”
“I do not have time for this,” Olivetti seethed. “Perhaps I should detain you until after the
conclave when I do have time.”
“Signore,” the guard urged, pointing to his watch again. “Spazzare di capella .”
Olivetti nodded and started to leave.
“Spazzare di capella?” Vittoria demanded. “You’re leaving to sweep the chapel?”
Olivetti turned, his eyes boring through her. “We sweep for electronic bugs, Miss Vetra–a
matter of discretion .” He motioned to her legs. “Not something I would expect you to understand.”
With that he slammed the door, rattling the heavy glass. In one fluid motion he produced a
key, inserted it, and twisted. A heavy deadbolt slid into place.
“Idiòta!” Vittoria yelled. “You can’t keep us in here!”
Through the glass, Langdon could see Olivetti say something to the guard. The sentinel
nodded. As Olivetti strode out of the room, the guard spun and faced them on the other side of the
glass, arms crossed, a large sidearm visible on his hip.
Perfect , Langdon thought. Just bloody perfect .
37
Vittoria glared at the Swiss Guard standing outside Olivetti’s locked door. The sentinel glared
back, his colorful costume belying his decidedly ominous air.
“Che fiasco ,” Vittoria thought. Held hostage by an armed man in pajamas .
Langdon had fallen silent, and Vittoria hoped he was using that Harvard brain of his to think
them out of this. She sensed, however, from the look on his face, that he was more in shock than in
thought. She regretted getting him so involved.
Vittoria’s first instinct was to pull out her cell phone and call Kohler, but she knew it was
foolish. First, the guard would probably walk in and take her phone. Second, if Kohler’s episode ran
its usual course, he was probably still incapacitated. Not that it mattered… Olivetti seemed unlikely
to take anybody’s word on anything at the moment.
Remember! she told herself. Remember the solution to this test!
Remembrance was a Buddhist philosopher’s trick. Rather than asking her mind to search for
a solution to a potentially impossible challenge, Vittoria asked her mind simply to remember it. The
presupposition that one once knew the answer created the mindset that the answer must exist …
thus eliminating the crippling conception of hopelessness. Vittoria often used the process to solve
scientific quandaries… those that most people thought had no solution.
At the moment, however, her remembrance trick was drawing a major blank. So she measured
her options… her needs. She needed to warn someone. Someone at the Vatican needed to take her
seriously. But who? The camerlegno? How? She was in a glass box with one exit.
Tools , she told herself. There are always tools. Reevaluate your environment .
Instinctively she lowered her shoulders, relaxed her eyes, and took three deep breaths into her
lungs. She sensed her heart rate slow and her muscles soften. The chaotic panic in her mind
dissolved. Okay , she thought, let your mind be free. What makes this situation positive? What are
my assets?
The analytical mind of Vittoria Vetra, once calmed, was a powerful force. Within seconds she
realized their incarceration was actually their key to escape.
“I’m making a phone call,” she said suddenly.
Langdon looked up. “I was about to suggest you call Kohler, but–”
“Not Kohler. Someone else.”
“Who?”
“The camerlegno.”
Langdon looked totally lost. “You’re calling the chamberlain? How?”
“Olivetti said the camerlegno was in the Pope’s office.”
“Okay. You know the Pope’s private number?”
“No. But I’m not calling on my phone.” She nodded to a high-tech phone system on
Olivetti’s desk. It was riddled with speed dial buttons. “The head of security must have a direct
line to the Pope’s office.”
“He also has a weight lifter with a gun planted six feet away.”
“And we’re locked in.”
“I was actually aware of that.”
“I mean the guard is locked out. This is Olivetti’s private office. I doubt anyone else has a
key.”
Langdon looked out at the guard. “This is pretty thin glass, and that’s a pretty big gun.”
“What’s he going to do, shoot me for using the phone?”
“Who the hell knows! This is a pretty strange place, and the way things are going–”
“Either that,” Vittoria said, “or we can spend the next five hours and forty-eight minutes in
Vatican Prison. At least we’ll have a front-row seat when the antimatter goes off.”
Langdon paled. “But the guard will get Olivetti the second you pick up that phone. Besides,
there are twenty buttons on there. And I don’t see any identification. You going to try them all and
hope to get lucky?”
“Nope,” she said, striding to the phone. “Just one.” Vittoria picked up the phone and pressed
the top button. “Number one . I bet you one of those Illuminati U.S. dollars you have in your pocket
that this is the Pope’s office. What else would take primary importance for a Swiss Guard
commander?”
Langdon did not have time to respond. The guard outside the door started rapping on the glass
with the butt of his gun. He motioned for her to set down the phone.
Vittoria winked at him. The guard seemed to inflate with rage.
Langdon moved away from the door and turned back to Vittoria. “You damn well better be
right, ‘cause this guy does not look amused!”
“Damn!” she said, listening to the receiver. “A recording.”
“Recording?” Langdon demanded. “The Pope has an answering machine?”
“It wasn’t the Pope’s office,” Vittoria said, hanging up. “It was the damn weekly menu for the
Vatican commissary.”
Langdon offered a weak smile to the guard outside who was now glaring angrily though the
glass while he hailed Olivetti on his walkie-talkie.
38
The Vatican switchboard is located in the Ufficio di Communicazione behind the Vatican post
office. It is a relatively small room containing an eight-line Corelco 141 switchboard. The office
handles over 2,000 calls a day, most routed automatically to the recording information system.
Tonight, the sole communications operator on duty sat quietly sipping a cup of caffeinated
tea. He felt proud to be one of only a handful of employees still allowed inside Vatican City tonight.
Of course the honor was tainted somewhat by the presence of the Swiss Guards hovering outside his
door. An escort to the bathroom , the operator thought. Ah, the indignities we endure in the name of
Holy Conclave .
Fortunately, the calls this evening had been light. Or maybe it was not so fortunate , he
thought. World interest in Vatican events seemed to have dwindled in the last few years. The
number of press calls had thinned, and even the crazies weren’t calling as often. The press office
had hoped tonight’s event would have more of a festive buzz about it. Sadly, though, despite St.
Peter’s Square being filled with press trucks, the vans looked to be mostly standard Italian and Euro
press. Only a handful of global cover-all networks were there… no doubt having sent their
giornalisti secundari .
The operator gripped his mug and wondered how long tonight would last. Midnight or so , he
guessed. Nowadays, most insiders already knew who was favored to become Pope well before
conclave convened, so the process was more of a three– or four-hour ritual than an actual election.
Of course, last-minute dissension in the ranks could prolong the ceremony through dawn… or
beyond. The conclave of 1831 had lasted fifty-four days. Not tonight , he told himself; rumor was
this conclave would be a “smoke-watch.”
The operator’s thoughts evaporated with the buzz of an inside line on his switchboard. He
looked at the blinking red light and scratched his head. That’s odd , he thought. The zero-line . Who
on the inside would be calling operator information tonight? Who is even inside?
“Città del Vaticano, prego?” he said, picking up the phone.
The voice on the line spoke in rapid Italian. The operator vaguely recognized the accent as
that common to Swiss Guards–fluent Italian tainted by the Franco-Swiss influence. This caller,
however, was most definitely not Swiss Guard.
On hearing the woman’s voice, the operator stood suddenly, almost spilling his tea. He shot a
look back down at the line. He had not been mistaken. An internal extension . The call was from the
inside. There must be some mistake! he thought. A woman inside Vatican City? Tonight?
The woman was speaking fast and furiously. The operator had spent enough years on the
phones to know when he was dealing with a pazzo . This woman did not sound crazy. She was
urgent but rational. Calm and efficient. He listened to her request, bewildered.
“Il camerlegno?” the operator said, still trying to figure out where the hell the call was
coming from. “I cannot possibly connect… yes, I am aware he is in the Pope’s office but… who are
you again?… and you want to warn him of…” He listened, more and more unnerved. Everyone is in
danger? How? And where are you calling from? “Perhaps I should contact the Swiss…” The
operator stopped short. “You say you’re where? Where? ”
He listened in shock, then made a decision. “Hold, please,” he said, putting the woman on
hold before she could respond. Then he called Commander Olivetti’s direct line. There is no way
that woman is really –
The line picked up instantly.
“Per l’amore di Dio!” a familiar woman’s voice shouted at him. “Place the damn call!”
The door of the Swiss Guards’ security center hissed open. The guards parted as Commander
Olivetti entered the room like a rocket. Turning the corner to his office, Olivetti confirmed what his
guard on the walkie-talkie had just told him; Vittoria Vetra was standing at his desk talking on the
commander’s private telephone.
Che coglioni che ha questa! he thought. The balls on this one!
Livid, he strode to the door and rammed the key into the lock. He pulled open the door and
demanded, “What are you doing?”
Vittoria ignored him. “Yes,” she was saying into the phone. “And I must warn–”
Olivetti ripped the receiver from her hand, and raised it to his ear. “Who the hell is this?”
For the tiniest of an instant, Olivetti’s inelastic posture slumped. “Yes, camerlegno…” he
said. “Correct, signore… but questions of security demand… of course not… I am holding her here
for… certainly, but…” He listened. “Yes, sir,” he said finally. “I will bring them up immediately.”
39
The Apostolic Palace is a conglomeration of buildings located near the Sistine Chapel in the
northeast corner of Vatican City. With a commanding view of St. Peter’s Square, the palace houses
both the Papal Apartments and the Office of the Pope.
Vittoria and Langdon followed in silence as Commander Olivetti led them down a long
rococo corridor, the muscles in his neck pulsing with rage. After climbing three sets of stairs, they
entered a wide, dimly lit hallway.
Langdon could not believe the artwork on the walls–mint-condition busts, tapestries,
friezes–works worth hundreds of thousands of dollars. Two-thirds of the way down the hall they
passed an alabaster fountain. Olivetti turned left into an alcove and strode to one of the largest doors
Langdon had ever seen.
“Ufficio di Papa ,” the commander declared, giving Vittoria an acrimonious scowl. Vittoria
didn’t flinch. She reached over Olivetti and knocked loudly on the door.
Office of the Pope , Langdon thought, having difficulty fathoming that he was standing
outside one of the most sacred rooms in all of world religion.
“Avanti!” someone called from within.
When the door opened, Langdon had to shield his eyes. The sunlight was blinding. Slowly,
the image before him came into focus.
The Office of the Pope seemed more of a ballroom than an office. Red marble floors sprawled
out in all directions to walls adorned with vivid frescoes. A colossal chandelier hung overhead,
beyond which a bank of arched windows offered a stunning panorama of the sun-drenched St.
Peter’s Square.
My God , Langdon thought. This is a room with a view .
At the far end of the hall, at a carved desk, a man sat writing furiously. “Avanti ,” he called
out again, setting down his pen and waving them over.
Olivetti led the way, his gait military. “Signore ,” he said apologetically. “No ho potuto– ”
The man cut him off. He stood and studied his two visitors.
The camerlegno was nothing like the images of frail, beatific old men Langdon usually
imagined roaming the Vatican. He wore no rosary beads or pendants. No heavy robes. He was
dressed instead in a simple black cassock that seemed to amplify the solidity of his substantial
frame. He looked to be in his late-thirties, indeed a child by Vatican standards. He had a
surprisingly handsome face, a swirl of coarse brown hair, and almost radiant green eyes that shone
as if they were somehow fueled by the mysteries of the universe. As the man drew nearer, though,
Langdon saw in his eyes a profound exhaustion–like a soul who had been through the toughest
fifteen days of his life.
“I am Carlo Ventresca,” he said, his English perfect. “The late Pope’s camerlegno.” His voice
was unpretentious and kind, with only the slightest hint of Italian inflection.
“Vittoria Vetra,” she said, stepping forward and offering her hand. “Thank you for seeing us.”
Olivetti twitched as the camerlegno shook Vittoria’s hand.
“This is Robert Langdon,” Vittoria said. “A religious historian from Harvard University.”
“Padre ,” Langdon said, in his best Italian accent. He bowed his head as he extended his hand.
“No, no,” the camerlegno insisted, lifting Langdon back up. “His Holiness’s office does not
make me holy. I am merely a priest–a chamberlain serving in a time of need.”
Langdon stood upright.
“Please,” the camerlegno said, “everyone sit.” He arranged some chairs around his desk.
Langdon and Vittoria sat. Olivetti apparently preferred to stand.
The camerlegno seated himself at the desk, folded his hands, sighed, and eyed his visitors.
“Signore,” Olivetti said. “The woman’s attire is my fault. I–”
“Her attire is not what concerns me,” the camerlegno replied, sounding too exhausted to be
bothered. “When the Vatican operator calls me a half hour before I begin conclave to tell me a
woman is calling from your private office to warn me of some sort of major security threat of
which I have not been informed, that concerns me.”
Olivetti stood rigid, his back arched like a soldier under intense inspection.
Langdon felt hypnotized by the camerlegno’s presence. Young and wearied as he was, the
priest had the air of some mythical hero–radiating charisma and authority.
“Signore,” Olivetti said, his tone apologetic but still unyielding. “You should not concern
yourself with matters of security. You have other responsibilities.”
“I am well aware of my other responsibilities. I am also aware that as direttore intermediario ,
I have a responsibility for the safety and well-being of everyone at this conclave. What is going on
here?”
“I have the situation under control.”
“Apparently not.”
“Father,” Langdon interrupted, taking out the crumpled fax and handing it to the camerlegno,
“please.”
Commander Olivetti stepped forward, trying to intervene. “Father, please do not trouble your
thoughts with–”
The camerlegno took the fax, ignoring Olivetti for a long moment. He looked at the image of
the murdered Leonardo Vetra and drew a startled breath. “What is this?”
“That is my father,” Vittoria said, her voice wavering. “He was a priest and a man of science.
He was murdered last night.”
The camerlegno’s face softened instantly. He looked up at her. “My dear child. I’m so sorry.”
He crossed himself and looked again at the fax, his eyes seeming to pool with waves of abhorrence.
“Who would… and this burn on his…” The camerlegno paused, squinting closer at the image.
“It says Illuminati ,” Langdon said. “No doubt you are familiar with the name.”
An odd look came across the camerlegno’s face. “I have heard the name, yes, but…”
“The Illuminati murdered Leonardo Vetra so they could steal a new technology he was–”
“Signore,” Olivetti interjected. “This is absurd. The Illuminati? This is clearly some sort of
elaborate hoax.”
The camerlegno seemed to ponder Olivetti’s words. Then he turned and contemplated
Langdon so fully that Langdon felt the air leave his lungs. “Mr. Langdon, I have spent my life in the
Catholic Church. I am familiar with the Illuminati lore… and the legend of the brandings. And yet I
must warn you, I am a man of the present tense. Christianity has enough real enemies without
resurrecting ghosts.”
“The symbol is authentic,” Langdon said, a little too defensively he thought. He reached over
and rotated the fax for the camerlegno.
The camerlegno fell silent when he saw the symmetry.
“Even modern computers,” Langdon added, “have been unable to forge a symmetrical
ambigram of this word.”
The camerlegno folded his hands and said nothing for a long time. “The Illuminati are dead,”
he finally said. “Long ago. That is historical fact.”
Langdon nodded. “Yesterday, I would have agreed with you.”
“Yesterday?”
“Before today’s chain of events. I believe the Illuminati have resurfaced to make good on an
ancient pact.”
“Forgive me. My history is rusty. What ancient pact is this?”
Langdon took a deep breath. “The destruction of Vatican City.”
“Destroy Vatican City?” The camerlegno looked less frightened than confused. “But that
would be impossible.”
Vittoria shook her head. “I’m afraid we have some more bad news.”
40
“Is this true ?” the camerlegno demanded, looking amazed as he turned from Vittoria to
Olivetti.
“Signore,” Olivetti assured, “I’ll admit there is some sort of device here. It is visible on one of
our security monitors, but as for Ms. Vetra’s claims as to the power of this substance, I cannot
possibly–”
“Wait a minute,” the camerlegno said. “You can see this thing?”
“Yes, signore. On wireless camera #86.”
“Then why haven’t you recovered it?” The camerlegno’s voice echoed anger now.
“Very difficult, signore.” Olivetti stood straight as he explained the situation.
The camerlegno listened, and Vittoria sensed his growing concern. “Are you certain it is
inside Vatican City?” the camerlegno asked. “Maybe someone took the camera out and is
transmitting from somewhere else.”
“Impossible,” Olivetti said. “Our external walls are shielded electronically to protect our
internal communications. This signal can only be coming from the inside or we would not be
receiving it.”
“And I assume,” he said, “that you are now looking for this missing camera with all available
resources?”
Olivetti shook his head. “No, signore. Locating that camera could take hundreds of man
hours. We have a number of other security concerns at the moment, and with all due respect to Ms.
Vetra, this droplet she talks about is very small. It could not possibly be as explosive as she claims.”
Vittoria’s patience evaporated. “That droplet is enough to level Vatican City! Did you even
listen to a word I told you?”
“Ma’am,” Olivetti said, his voice like steel, “my experience with explosives is extensive.”
“Your experience is obsolete,” she fired back, equally tough. “Despite my attire, which I
realize you find troublesome, I am a senior level physicist at the world’s most advanced subatomic
research facility. I personally designed the antimatter trap that is keeping that sample from
annihilating right now. And I am warning you that unless you find that canister in the next six
hours, your guards will have nothing to protect for the next century but a big hole in the ground.”
Olivetti wheeled to the camerlegno, his insect eyes flashing rage. “Signore, I cannot in good
conscience allow this to go any further. Your time is being wasted by pranksters. The Illuminati? A
droplet that will destroy us all?”
“Basta ,” the camerlegno declared. He spoke the word quietly and yet it seemed to echo
across the chamber. Then there was silence. He continued in a whisper. “Dangerous or not,
Illuminati or no Illuminati, whatever this thing is, it most certainly should not be inside Vatican
City… no less on the eve of the conclave. I want it found and removed. Organize a search
immediately.”
Olivetti persisted. “Signore, even if we used all the guards to search the complex, it could take
days to find this camera. Also, after speaking to Ms. Vetra, I had one of my guards consult our most
advanced ballistics guide for any mention of this substance called antimatter. I found no mention of
it anywhere. Nothing.”
Pompous ass , Vittoria thought. A ballistics guide? Did you try an encyclopedia? Under A!
Olivetti was still talking. “Signore, if you are suggesting we make a naked-eye search of the
entirety of Vatican City then I must object.”
“Commander.” The camerlegno’s voice simmered with rage. “May I remind you that when
you address me, you are addressing this office. I realize you do not take my position
seriously–nonetheless, by law, I am in charge. If I am not mistaken, the cardinals are now safely
within the Sistine Chapel, and your security concerns are at a minimum until the conclave breaks. I
do not understand why you are hesitant to look for this device. If I did not know better it would
appear that you are causing this conclave intentional danger.”
Olivetti looked scornful. “How dare you! I have served your Pope for twelve years! And the
Pope before that for fourteen years! Since 1438 the Swiss Guard have–”
The walkie-talkie on Olivetti’s belt squawked loudly, cutting him off. “Comandante? ”
Olivetti snatched it up and pressed the transmitter. “Sto ocupato! Cosa voi! ”
“Scusi ,” the Swiss Guard on the radio said. “Communications here. I thought you would want
to be informed that we have received a bomb threat.”
Olivetti could not have looked less interested. “So handle it! Run the usual trace, and write it
up.”
“We did, sir, but the caller…” The guard paused. “I would not trouble you, commander,
except that he mentioned the substance you just asked me to research. Antimatter .”
Everyone in the room exchanged stunned looks.
“He mentioned what ?” Olivetti stammered.
“Antimatter, sir. While we were trying to run a trace, I did some additional research on his
claim. The information on antimatter is… well, frankly, it’s quite troubling.”
“I thought you said the ballistics guide showed no mention of it.”
“I found it on-line.”
Alleluia , Vittoria thought.
“The substance appears to be quite explosive,” the guard said. “It’s hard to imagine this
information is accurate but it says here that pound for pound antimatter carries about a hundred
times more payload than a nuclear warhead.”
Olivetti slumped. It was like watching a mountain crumble. Vittoria’s feeling of triumph was
erased by the look of horror on the camerlegno’s face.
“Did you trace the call?” Olivetti stammered.
“No luck. Cellular with heavy encryption. The SAT lines are interfused, so triangulation is
out. The IF signature suggests he’s somewhere in Rome, but there’s really no way to trace him.”
“Did he make demands?” Olivetti said, his voice quiet.
“No, sir. Just warned us that there is antimatter hidden inside the complex. He seemed
surprised I didn’t know. Asked me if I’d seen it yet. You’d asked me about antimatter, so I
decided to advise you.”
“You did the right thing,” Olivetti said. “I’ll be down in a minute. Alert me immediately if he
calls back.”
There was a moment of silence on the walkie-talkie. “The caller is still on the line, sir.”
Olivetti looked like he’d just been electrocuted. “The line is open?”
“Yes, sir. We’ve been trying to trace him for ten minutes, getting nothing but splayed
ferreting. He must know we can’t touch him because he refuses to hang up until he speaks to the
camerlegno.”
“Patch him through,” the camerlegno commanded. “Now!”
Olivetti wheeled. “Father, no. A trained Swiss Guard negotiator is much better suited to
handle this.”
“Now! ”
Olivetti gave the order.
A moment later, the phone on Camerlegno Ventresca’s desk began to ring. The camerlegno
rammed his finger down on the speaker-phone button. “Who in the name of God do you think you
are?”
41
The voice emanating from the camerlegno’s speaker phone was metallic and cold, laced with
arrogance. Everyone in the room listened.
Langdon tried to place the accent. Middle Eastern, perhaps?
“I am a messenger of an ancient brotherhood,” the voice announced in an alien cadence. “A
brotherhood you have wronged for centuries. I am a messenger of the Illuminati.”
Langdon felt his muscles tighten, the last shreds of doubt withering away. For an instant he
felt the familiar collision of thrill, privilege, and dead fear that he had experienced when he first saw
the ambigram this morning.
“What do you want?” the camerlegno demanded.
“I represent men of science. Men who like yourselves are searching for the answers. Answers
to man’s destiny, his purpose, his creator.”
“Whoever you are,” the camerlegno said, “I–”
“Silenzio . You will do better to listen. For two millennia your church has dominated the quest
for truth. You have crushed your opposition with lies and prophesies of doom. You have
manipulated the truth to serve your needs, murdering those whose discoveries did not serve your
politics. Are you surprised you are the target of enlightened men from around the globe?”
“Enlightened men do not resort to blackmail to further their causes.”
“Blackmail?” The caller laughed. “This is not blackmail. We have no demands. The abolition
of the Vatican is nonnegotiable. We have waited four hundred years for this day. At midnight, your
city will be destroyed. There is nothing you can do.”
Olivetti stormed toward the speaker phone. “Access to this city is impossible! You could not
possibly have planted explosives in here!”
“You speak with the ignorant devotion of a Swiss Guard. Perhaps even an officer? Surely you
are aware that for centuries the Illuminati have infiltrated elitist organizations across the globe. Do
you really believe the Vatican is immune?”
Jesus , Langdon thought, they’ve got someone on the inside . It was no secret that infiltration
was the Illuminati trademark of power. They had infiltrated the Masons, major banking networks,
government bodies. In fact, Churchill had once told reporters that if English spies had infiltrated the
Nazis to the degree the Illuminati had infiltrated English Parliament, the war would have been over
in one month.
“A transparent bluff,” Olivetti snapped. “Your influence cannot possibly extend so far.”
“Why? Because your Swiss Guards are vigilant? Because they watch every corner of your
private world? How about the Swiss Guards themselves? Are they not men? Do you truly believe
they stake their lives on a fable about a man who walks on water? Ask yourself how else the
canister could have entered your city. Or how four of your most precious assets could have
disappeared this afternoon.”
“Our assets?” Olivetti scowled. “What do you mean?”
“One, two, three, four. You haven’t missed them by now?”
“What the hell are you talk–” Olivetti stopped short, his eyes rocketing wide as though he’d
just been punched in the gut.
“Light dawns,” the caller said. “Shall I read their names?”
“What’s going on?” the camerlegno said, looking bewildered.
The caller laughed. “Your officer has not yet informed you? How sinful. No surprise. Such
pride. I imagine the disgrace of telling you the truth… that four cardinals he had sworn to protect
seem to have disappeared…”
Olivetti erupted. “Where did you get this information!”
“Camerlegno,” the caller gloated, “ask your commander if all your cardinals are present in the
Sistine Chapel.”
The camerlegno turned to Olivetti, his green eyes demanding an explanation.
“Signore,” Olivetti whispered in the camerlegno’s ear, “it is true that four of our cardinals
have not yet reported to the Sistine Chapel, but there is no need for alarm. Every one of them
checked into the residence hall this morning, so we know they are safely inside Vatican City. You
yourself had tea with them only hours ago. They are simply late for the fellowship preceding
conclave. We are searching, but I’m sure they just lost track of time and are still out enjoying the
grounds.”
“Enjoying the grounds?” The calm departed from the camerlegno’s voice. “They were due in
the chapel over an hour ago!”
Langdon shot Vittoria a look of amazement. Missing cardinals? So that’s what they were
looking for downstairs?
“Our inventory,” the caller said, “you will find quite convincing. There is Cardinal Lamassé
from Paris, Cardinal Guidera from Barcelona, Cardinal Ebner from Frankfurt…”
Olivetti seemed to shrink smaller and smaller after each name was read.
The caller paused, as though taking special pleasure in the final name. “And from Italy…
Cardinal Baggia.”
The camerlegno loosened like a tall ship that had just run sheets first into a dead calm. His
frock billowed, and he collapsed in his chair. “I preferiti ,” he whispered. “The four favorites…
including Baggia… the most likely successor as Supreme Pontiff… how is it possible?”
Langdon had read enough about modern papal elections to understand the look of desperation
on the camerlegno’s face. Although technically any cardinal under eighty years old could become
Pope, only a very few had the respect necessary to command a two-thirds majority in the
ferociously partisan balloting procedure. They were known as the preferiti . And they were all gone.
Sweat dripped from the camerlegno’s brow. “What do you intend with these men?”
“What do you think I intend? I am a descendant of the Hassassin.”
Langdon felt a shiver. He knew the name well. The church had made some deadly enemies
through the years–the Hassassin, the Knights Templar, armies that had been either hunted by the
Vatican or betrayed by them.
“Let the cardinals go,” the camerlegno said. “Isn’t threatening to destroy the City of God
enough?”
“Forget your four cardinals. They are lost to you. Be assured their deaths will be remembered
though… by millions. Every martyr’s dream. I will make them media luminaries. One by one. By
midnight the Illuminati will have everyone’s attention. Why change the world if the world is not
watching? Public killings have an intoxicating horror about them, don’t they? You proved that long
ago… the inquisition, the torture of the Knights Templar, the Crusades.” He paused. “And of
course, la purga .”
The camerlegno was silent.
“Do you not recall la purga ?” the caller asked. “Of course not, you are a child. Priests are
poor historians, anyway. Perhaps because their history shames them?”
“La purga ,” Langdon heard himself say. “Sixteen sixty-eight. The church branded four
Illuminati scientists with the symbol of the cross. To purge their sins.”
“Who is speaking?” the voice demanded, sounding more intrigued than concerned. “Who else
is there?”
Langdon felt shaky. “My name is not important,” he said, trying to keep his voice from
wavering. Speaking to a living Illuminatus was disorienting for him… like speaking to George
Washington. “I am an academic who has studied the history of your brotherhood.”
“Superb,” the voice replied. “I am pleased there are still those alive who remember the crimes
against us.”
“Most of us think you are dead.”
“A misconception the brotherhood has worked hard to promote. What else do you know of la
purga ?”
Langdon hesitated. What else do I know? That this whole situation is insanity, that’s what I
know! “After the brandings, the scientists were murdered, and their bodies were dropped in public
locations around Rome as a warning to other scientists not to join the Illuminati.”
“Yes. So we shall do the same. Quid pro quo . Consider it symbolic retribution for our slain
brothers. Your four cardinals will die, one every hour starting at eight. By midnight the whole world
will be enthralled.”
Langdon moved toward the phone. “You actually intend to brand and kill these four men?”
“History repeats itself, does it not? Of course, we will be more elegant and bold than the
church was. They killed privately, dropping bodies when no one was looking. It seems so
cowardly.”
“What are you saying?” Langdon asked. “That you are going to brand and kill these men in
public ?”
“Very good. Although it depends what you consider public. I realize not many people go to
church anymore.”
Langdon did a double take. “You’re going to kill them in churches ?”
“A gesture of kindness. Enabling God to command their souls to heaven more expeditiously.
It seems only right. Of course the press will enjoy it too, I imagine.”
“You’re bluffing,” Olivetti said, the cool back in his voice. “You cannot kill a man in a
church and expect to get away with it.”
“Bluffing? We move among your Swiss Guard like ghosts, remove four of your cardinals
from within your walls, plant a deadly explosive at the heart of your most sacred shrine, and you
think this is a bluff? As the killings occur and the victims are found, the media will swarm. By
midnight the world will know the Illuminati cause.”
“And if we stake guards in every church?” Olivetti said.
The caller laughed. “I fear the prolific nature of your religion will make that a trying task.
Have you not counted lately? There are over four hundred Catholic churches in Rome. Cathedrals,
chapels, tabernacles, abbeys, monasteries, convents, parochial schools…”
Olivetti’s face remained hard.
“In ninety minutes it begins,” the caller said with a note of finality. “One an hour. A
mathematical progression of death. Now I must go.”
“Wait!” Langdon demanded. “Tell me about the brands you intend to use on these men.”
The killer sounded amused. “I suspect you know what the brands will be already. Or perhaps
you are a skeptic? You will see them soon enough. Proof the ancient legends are true.”
Langdon felt light-headed. He knew exactly what the man was claiming. Langdon pictured
the brand on Leonardo Vetra’s chest. Illuminati folklore spoke of five brands in all. Four brands
are left , Langdon thought, and four missing cardinals .
“I am sworn,” the camerlegno said, “to bring a new Pope tonight. Sworn by God.”
“Camerlegno,” the caller said, “the world does not need a new Pope. After midnight he will
have nothing to rule over but a pile of rubble. The Catholic Church is finished. Your run on earth is
done.”
Silence hung.
The camerlegno looked sincerely sad. “You are misguided. A church is more than mortar and
stone. You cannot simply erase two thousand years of faith… any faith. You cannot crush faith
simply by removing its earthly manifestations. The Catholic Church will continue with or without
Vatican City.”
“A noble lie. But a lie all the same. We both know the truth. Tell me, why is Vatican City a
walled citadel?”
“Men of God live in a dangerous world,” the camerlegno said.
“How young are you? The Vatican is a fortress because the Catholic Church holds half of its
equity inside its walls–rare paintings, sculpture, devalued jewels, priceless books… then there is
the gold bullion and the real estate deeds inside the Vatican Bank vaults. Inside estimates put the
raw value of Vatican City at 48.5 billion dollars. Quite a nest egg you’re sitting on. Tomorrow it
will be ash. Liquidated assets as it were. You will be bankrupt. Not even men of cloth can work for
nothing.”
The accuracy of the statement seemed to be reflected in Olivetti’s and the camerlegno’s
shell-shocked looks. Langdon wasn’t sure what was more amazing, that the Catholic Church had
that kind of money, or that the Illuminati somehow knew about it.
The camerlegno sighed heavily. “Faith, not money, is the backbone of this church.”
“More lies,” the caller said. “Last year you spent 183 million dollars trying to support your
struggling dioceses worldwide. Church attendance is at an all-time low–down forty-six percent in
the last decade. Donations are half what they were only seven years ago. Fewer and fewer men are
entering the seminary. Although you will not admit it, your church is dying. Consider this a chance
to go out with a bang.”
Olivetti stepped forward. He seemed less combative now, as if he now sensed the reality
facing him. He looked like a man searching for an out. Any out. “And what if some of that bullion
went to fund your cause?”
“Do not insult us both.”
“We have money.”
“As do we. More than you can fathom.”
Langdon flashed on the alleged Illuminati fortunes, the ancient wealth of the Bavarian stone
masons, the Rothschilds, the Bilderbergers, the legendary Illuminati Diamond.
“I preferiti ,” the camerlegno said, changing the subject. His voice was pleading. “Spare them.
They are old. They–”
“They are virgin sacrifices.” The caller laughed. “Tell me, do you think they are really
virgins? Will the little lambs squeal when they die? Sacrifici vergini nell’ altare di scienza .”
The camerlegno was silent for a long time. “They are men of faith,” he finally said. “They do
not fear death.”
The caller sneered. “Leonardo Vetra was a man of faith, and yet I saw fear in his eyes last
night. A fear I removed.”
Vittoria, who had been silent, was suddenly airborne, her body taut with hatred. “Asino! He
was my father!”
A cackle echoed from the speaker. “Your father? What is this? Vetra has a daughter? You
should know your father whimpered like a child at the end. Pitiful really. A pathetic man.”
Vittoria reeled as if knocked backward by the words. Langdon reached for her, but she
regained her balance and fixed her dark eyes on the phone. “I swear on my life, before this night is
over, I will find you.” Her voice sharpened like a laser. “And when I do…”
The caller laughed coarsely. “A woman of spirit. I am aroused. Perhaps before this night is
over, I will find you . And when I do…”
The words hung like a blade. Then he was gone.
42
Cardinal Mortati was sweating now in his black robe. Not only was the Sistine Chapel starting
to feel like a sauna, but conclave was scheduled to begin in twenty minutes, and there was still no
word on the four missing cardinals. In their absence, the initial whispers of confusion among the
other cardinals had turned to outspoken anxiety.
Mortati could not imagine where the truant men could be. With the camerlegno perhaps? He
knew the camerlegno had held the traditional private tea for the four preferiti earlier that
afternoon, but that had been hours ago. Were they ill? Something they ate? Mortati doubted it.
Even on the verge of death the preferiti would be here. It was once in a lifetime, usually never ,
that a cardinal had the chance to be elected Supreme Pontiff, and by Vatican Law the cardinal had
to be inside the Sistine Chapel when the vote took place. Otherwise, he was ineligible.
Although there were four preferiti , few cardinals had any doubt who the next Pope would be.
The past fifteen days had seen a blizzard of faxes and phone calls discussing potential candidates.
As was the custom, four names had been chosen as preferiti , each of them fulfilling the unspoken
requisites for becoming Pope:
Multilingual in Italian, Spanish, and English.
No skeletons in his closet.
Between sixty-five and eighty years old.
As usual, one of the preferiti had risen above the others as the man the college proposed to
elect. Tonight that man was Cardinal Aldo Baggia from Milan. Baggia’s untainted record of
service, combined with unparalleled language skills and the ability to communicate the essence of
spirituality, had made him the clear favorite.
So where the devil is he? Mortati wondered.
Mortati was particularly unnerved by the missing cardinals because the task of supervising
this conclave had fallen to him. A week ago, the College of Cardinals had unanimously chosen
Mortati for the office known as The Great Elector –the conclave’s internal master of ceremonies.
Even though the camerlegno was the church’s ranking official, the camerlegno was only a priest
and had little familiarity with the complex election process, so one cardinal was selected to oversee
the ceremony from within the Sistine Chapel.
Cardinals often joked that being appointed The Great Elector was the cruelest honor in
Christendom. The appointment made one ineligible as a candidate during the election, and it also
required one spend many days prior to conclave poring over the pages of the Universi Dominici
Gregis reviewing the subtleties of conclave’s arcane rituals to ensure the election was properly
administered.
Mortati held no grudge, though. He knew he was the logical choice. Not only was he the
senior cardinal, but he had also been a confidant of the late Pope, a fact that elevated his esteem.
Although Mortati was technically still within the legal age window for election, he was getting a bit
old to be a serious candidate. At seventy-nine years old he had crossed the unspoken threshold
beyond which the college no longer trusted one’s health to withstand the rigorous schedule of the
papacy. A Pope usually worked fourteen-hour days, seven days a week, and died of exhaustion in
an average of 6.3 years. The inside joke was that accepting the papacy was a cardinal’s “fastest
route to heaven.”
Mortati, many believed, could have been Pope in his younger days had he not been so
broad-minded. When it came to pursuing the papacy, there was a Holy Trinity–Conservative.
Conservative. Conservative.
Mortati had always found it pleasantly ironic that the late Pope, God rest his soul, had
revealed himself as surprisingly liberal once he had taken office. Perhaps sensing the modern world
progressing away from the church, the Pope had made overtures, softening the church’s position on
the sciences, even donating money to selective scientific causes. Sadly, it had been political suicide.
Conservative Catholics declared the Pope “senile,” while scientific purists accused him of trying to
spread the church’s influence where it did not belong.
“So where are they?”
Mortati turned.
One of the cardinals was tapping him nervously on the shoulder. “You know where they are,
don’t you?”
Mortati tried not to show too much concern. “Perhaps still with the camerlegno.”
“At this hour? That would be highly unorthodox!” The cardinal frowned mistrustingly.
“Perhaps the camerlegno lost track of time?”
Mortati sincerely doubted it, but he said nothing. He was well aware that most cardinals did
not much care for the camerlegno, feeling he was too young to serve the Pope so closely. Mortati
suspected much of the cardinals’ dislike was jealousy, and Mortati actually admired the young man,
secretly applauding the late Pope’s selection for chamberlain. Mortati saw only conviction when he
looked in the camerlegno’s eyes, and unlike many of the cardinals, the camerlegno put church and
faith before petty politics. He was truly a man of God.
Throughout his tenure, the camerlegno’s steadfast devotion had become legendary. Many
attributed it to the miraculous event in his childhood… an event that would have left a permanent
impression on any man’s heart. The miracle and wonder of it , Mortati thought, often wishing his
own childhood had presented an event that fostered that kind of doubtless faith.
Unfortunately for the church, Mortati knew, the camerlegno would never become Pope in his
elder years. Attaining the papacy required a certain amount of political ambition, something the
young camerlegno apparently lacked; he had refused his Pope’s offers for higher clerical stations
many times, saying he preferred to serve the church as a simple man.
“What next?” The cardinal tapped Mortati, waiting.
Mortati looked up. “I’m sorry?”
“They’re late! What shall we do?”
“What can we do?” Mortati replied. “We wait. And have faith.”
Looking entirely unsatisfied with Mortati’s response, the cardinal shrunk back into the
shadows.
Mortati stood a moment, dabbing his temples and trying to clear his mind. Indeed, what shall
we do? He gazed past the altar up to Michelangelo’s renowned fresco, “The Last Judgment.” The
painting did nothing to soothe his anxiety. It was a horrifying, fifty-foot-tall depiction of Jesus
Christ separating mankind into the righteous and sinners, casting the sinners into hell. There was
flayed flesh, burning bodies, and even one of Michelangelo’s rivals sitting in hell wearing ass’s
ears. Guy de Maupassant had once written that the painting looked like something painted for a
carnival wrestling booth by an ignorant coal heaver.
Cardinal Mortati had to agree.
43
Langdon stood motionless at the Pope’s bulletproof window and gazed down at the bustle of
media trailers in St. Peter’s Square. The eerie phone conversation had left him feeling turgid…
distended somehow. Not himself.
The Illuminati, like a serpent from the forgotten depths of history, had risen and wrapped
themselves around an ancient foe. No demands. No negotiation. Just retribution. Demonically
simple. Squeezing. A revenge 400 years in the making. It seemed that after centuries of persecution,
science had bitten back.
The camerlegno stood at his desk, staring blankly at the phone. Olivetti was the first to break
the silence. “Carlo,” he said, using the camerlegno’s first name and sounding more like a weary
friend than an officer. “For twenty-six years, I have sworn my life to the protection of this office. It
seems tonight I am dishonored.”
The camerlegno shook his head. “You and I serve God in different capacities, but service
always brings honor.”
“These events… I can’t imagine how… this situation…” Olivetti looked overwhelmed.
“You realize we have only one possible course of action. I have a responsibility for the safety
of the College of Cardinals.”
“I fear that responsibility was mine, signore.”
“Then your men will oversee the immediate evacuation.”
“Signore?”
“Other options can be exercised later–a search for this device, a manhunt for the missing
cardinals and their captors. But first the cardinals must be taken to safety. The sanctity of human
life weighs above all. Those men are the foundation of this church.”
“You suggest we cancel conclave right now?”
“Do I have a choice?”
“What about your charge to bring a new Pope?”
The young chamberlain sighed and turned to the window, his eyes drifting out onto the sprawl
of Rome below. “His Holiness once told me that a Pope is a man torn between two worlds… the
real world and the divine. He warned that any church that ignored reality would not survive to enjoy
the divine.” His voice sounded suddenly wise for its years. “The real world is upon us tonight. We
would be vain to ignore it. Pride and precedent cannot overshadow reason.”
Olivetti nodded, looking impressed. “I have underestimated you, signore.”
The camerlegno did not seem to hear. His gaze was distant on the window.
“I will speak openly, signore. The real world is my world. I immerse myself in its ugliness
every day such that others are unencumbered to seek something more pure. Let me advise you on
the present situation. It is what I am trained for. Your instincts, though worthy… could be
disastrous.”
The camerlegno turned.
Olivetti sighed. “The evacuation of the College of Cardinals from the Sistine Chapel is the
worst possible thing you could do right now.”
The camerlegno did not look indignant, only at a loss. “What do you suggest?”
“Say nothing to the cardinals. Seal conclave. It will buy us time to try other options.”
The camerlegno looked troubled. “Are you suggesting I lock the entire College of Cardinals
on top of a time bomb?”
“Yes, signore. For now. Later, if need be, we can arrange evacuation.”
The camerlegno shook his head. “Postponing the ceremony before it starts is grounds alone
for an inquiry, but after the doors are sealed nothing intervenes. Conclave procedure obligates–”
“Real world, signore. You’re in it tonight. Listen closely.” Olivetti spoke now with the
efficient rattle of a field officer. “Marching one hundred sixty-five cardinals unprepared and
unprotected into Rome would be reckless. It would cause confusion and panic in some very old
men, and frankly, one fatal stroke this month is enough.”
One fatal stroke . The commander’s words recalled the headlines Langdon had read over
dinner with some students in the Harvard Commons:
Pope suffers stroke.
Dies in sleep.
“In addition,” Olivetti said, “the Sistine Chapel is a fortress. Although we don’t advertise the
fact, the structure is heavily reinforced and can repel any attack short of missiles. As preparation we
searched every inch of the chapel this afternoon, scanning for bugs and other surveillance
equipment. The chapel is clean, a safe haven, and I am confident the antimatter is not inside. There
is no safer place those men can be right now. We can always discuss emergency evacuation later if
it comes to that.”
Langdon was impressed. Olivetti’s cold, smart logic reminded him of Kohler.
“Commander,” Vittoria said, her voice tense, “there are other concerns. Nobody has ever
created this much antimatter. The blast radius, I can only estimate. Some of surrounding Rome may
be in danger. If the canister is in one of your central buildings or underground, the effect outside
these walls may be minimal, but if the canister is near the perimeter… in this building for
example…” She glanced warily out the window at the crowd in St. Peter’s Square.
“I am well aware of my responsibilities to the outside world,” Olivetti replied, “and it makes
this situation no more grave. The protection of this sanctuary has been my sole charge for over two
decades. I have no intention of allowing this weapon to detonate.”
Camerlegno Ventresca looked up. “You think you can find it?”
“Let me discuss our options with some of my surveillance specialists. There is a possibility, if
we kill power to Vatican City, that we can eliminate the background RF and create a clean enough
environment to get a reading on that canister’s magnetic field.”
Vittoria looked surprised, and then impressed. “You want to black out Vatican City?”
“Possibly. I don’t yet know if it’s possible, but it is one option I want to explore.”
“The cardinals would certainly wonder what happened,” Vittoria remarked.
Olivetti shook his head. “Conclaves are held by candlelight. The cardinals would never know.
After conclave is sealed, I could pull all except a few of my perimeter guards and begin a search. A
hundred men could cover a lot of ground in five hours.”
“Four hours,” Vittoria corrected. “I need to fly the canister back to CERN. Detonation is
unavoidable without recharging the batteries.”
“There’s no way to recharge here?”
Vittoria shook her head. “The interface is complex. I’d have brought it if I could.”
“Four hours then,” Olivetti said, frowning. “Still time enough. Panic serves no one. Signore,
you have ten minutes. Go to the chapel, seal conclave. Give my men some time to do their job. As
we get closer to the critical hour, we will make the critical decisions.”
Langdon wondered how close to “the critical hour” Olivetti would let things get.
The camerlegno looked troubled. “But the college will ask about the preferiti … especially
about Baggia… where they are.”
“Then you will have to think of something, signore. Tell them you served the four cardinals
something at tea that disagreed with them.”
The camerlegno looked riled. “Stand on the altar of the Sistine Chapel and lie to the College
of Cardinals?”
“For their own safety. Una bugia veniale . A white lie. Your job will be to keep the peace.”
Olivetti headed for the door. “Now if you will excuse me, I need to get started.”
“Comandante,” the camerlegno urged, “we cannot simply turn our backs on missing
cardinals.”
Olivetti stopped in the doorway. “Baggia and the others are currently outside our sphere of
influence. We must let them go… for the good of the whole. The military calls it triage .”
“Don’t you mean abandonment ?”
His voice hardened. “If there were any way, signore… any way in heaven to locate those
four cardinals, I would lay down my life to do it. And yet…” He pointed across the room at the
window where the early evening sun glinted off an endless sea of Roman rooftops. “Searching a
city of five million is not within my power. I will not waste precious time to appease my conscience
in a futile exercise. I’m sorry.”
Vittoria spoke suddenly. “But if we caught the killer, couldn’t you make him talk?”
Olivetti frowned at her. “Soldiers cannot afford to be saints, Ms. Vetra. Believe me, I
empathize with your personal incentive to catch this man.”
“It’s not only personal,” she said. “The killer knows where the antimatter is… and the
missing cardinals. If we could somehow find him…”
“Play into their hands?” Olivetti said. “Believe me, removing all protection from Vatican City
in order to stake out hundreds of churches is what the Illuminati hope we will do… wasting
precious time and manpower when we should be searching… or worse yet, leaving the Vatican
Bank totally unprotected. Not to mention the remaining cardinals.”
The point hit home.
“How about the Roman Police?” the camerlegno asked. “We could alert citywide enforcement
of the crisis. Enlist their help in finding the cardinals’ captor.”
“Another mistake,” Olivetti said. “You know how the Roman Carbonieri feel about us.
We’d get a half-hearted effort of a few men in exchange for their selling our crisis to the global
media. Exactly what our enemies want. We’ll have to deal with the media soon enough as it is.”
I will make your cardinals media luminaries , Langdon thought, recalling the killer’s words.
The first cardinal’s body appears at eight o’clock . Then one every hour . The press will love it .
The camerlegno was talking again, a trace of anger in his voice. “Commander, we cannot in
good conscience do nothing about the missing cardinals!”
Olivetti looked the camerlegno dead in the eye. “The prayer of St. Francis, signore. Do you
recall it?”
The young priest spoke the single line with pain in his voice. “God, grant me strength to
accept those things I cannot change.”
“Trust me,” Olivetti said. “This is one of those things.” Then he was gone.
44
The central office of the British Broadcast Corporation (BBC) is in London just west of
Piccadilly Circus. The switchboard phone rang, and a junior content editor picked up.
“BBC,” she said, stubbing out her Dunhill cigarette.
The voice on the line was raspy, with a Mid-East accent. “I have a breaking story your
network might be interested in.”
The editor took out a pen and a standard Lead Sheet. “Regarding?”
“The papal election.”
She frowned wearily. The BBC had run a preliminary story yesterday to mediocre response.
The public, it seemed, had little interest in Vatican City. “What’s the angle?”
“Do you have a TV reporter in Rome covering the election?”
“I believe so.”
“I need to speak to him directly.”
“I’m sorry, but I cannot give you that number without some idea–”
“There is a threat to the conclave. That is all I can tell you.”
The editor took notes. “Your name?”
“My name is immaterial.”
The editor was not surprised. “And you have proof of this claim?”
“I do.”
“I would be happy to take the information, but it is not our policy to give out our reporters’
numbers unless–”
“I understand. I will call another network. Thank you for your time. Good-b–”
“Just a moment,” she said. “Can you hold?”
The editor put the caller on hold and stretched her neck. The art of screening out potential
crank calls was by no means a perfect science, but this caller had just passed the BBC’s two tacit
tests for authenticity of a phone source. He had refused to give his name, and he was eager to get off
the phone. Hacks and glory hounds usually whined and pleaded.
Fortunately for her, reporters lived in eternal fear of missing the big story, so they seldom
chastised her for passing along the occasional delusional psychotic. Wasting five minutes of a
reporter’s time was forgivable. Missing a headline was not.
Yawning, she looked at her computer and typed in the keywords “Vatican City.” When she
saw the name of the field reporter covering the papal election, she chuckled to herself. He was a
new guy the BBC had just brought up from some trashy London tabloid to handle some of the
BBC’s more mundane coverage. Editorial had obviously started him at the bottom rung.
He was probably bored out of his mind, waiting all night to record his live ten-second video
spot. He would most likely be grateful for a break in the monotony.
The BBC content editor copied down the reporter’s satellite extension in Vatican City. Then,
lighting another cigarette, she gave the anonymous caller the reporter’s number.
45
“It won’t work,” Vittoria said, pacing the Pope’s office. She looked up at the camerlegno.
“Even if a Swiss Guard team can filter electronic interference, they will have to be practically on
top of the canister before they detect any signal. And that’s if the canister is even accessible…
unenclosed by other barriers. What if it’s buried in a metal box somewhere on your grounds? Or up
in a metal ventilating duct. There’s no way they’ll trace it. And what if the Swiss Guards have
been infiltrated? Who’s to say the search will be clean?”
The camerlegno looked drained. “What are you proposing, Ms. Vetra?”
Vittoria felt flustered. Isn’t it obvious? “I am proposing, sir, that you take other precautions
immediately . We can hope against all hope that the commander’s search is successful. At the same
time, look out the window. Do you see those people? Those buildings across the piazza? Those
media vans? The tourists? They are quite possibly within range of the blast. You need to act now .”
The camerlegno nodded vacantly.
Vittoria felt frustrated. Olivetti had convinced everyone there was plenty of time. But Vittoria
knew if news of the Vatican predicament leaked out, the entire area could fill with onlookers in a
matter of minutes. She had seen it once outside the Swiss Parliament building. During a hostage
situation involving a bomb, thousands had congregated outside the building to witness the outcome.
Despite police warnings that they were in danger, the crowd packed in closer and closer. Nothing
captured human interest like human tragedy.
“Signore,” Vittoria urged, “the man who killed my father is out there somewhere. Every cell
in this body wants to run from here and hunt him down. But I am standing in your office… because
I have a responsibility to you. To you and others. Lives are in danger, signore. Do you hear me?”
The camerlegno did not answer.
Vittoria could hear her own heart racing. Why couldn’t the Swiss Guard trace that damn
caller? The Illuminati assassin is the key! He knows where the antimatter is … hell, he knows
where the cardinals are! Catch the killer, and everything is solved .
Vittoria sensed she was starting to come unhinged, an alien distress she recalled only faintly
from childhood, the orphanage years, frustration with no tools to handle it. You have tools , she told
herself, you always have tools . But it was no use. Her thoughts intruded, strangling her. She was a
researcher and problem solver. But this was a problem with no solution. What data do you require?
What do you want? She told herself to breathe deeply, but for the first time in her life, she could
not. She was suffocating.
Langdon’s head ached, and he felt like he was skirting the edges of rationality. He watched
Vittoria and the camerlegno, but his vision was blurred by hideous images: explosions, press
swarming, cameras rolling, four branded humans.
Shaitan … Lucifer … Bringer of light … Satan …
He shook the fiendish images from his mind. Calculated terrorism , he reminded himself,
grasping at reality. Planned chaos . He thought back to a Radcliffe seminar he had once audited
while researching praetorian symbolism. He had never seen terrorists the same way since.
“Terrorism,” the professor had lectured, “has a singular goal. What is it?”
“Killing innocent people?” a student ventured.
“Incorrect. Death is only a byproduct of terrorism.”
“A show of strength?”
“No. A weaker persuasion does not exist.”
“To cause terror?”
“Concisely put. Quite simply, the goal of terrorism is to create terror and fear. Fear
undermines faith in the establishment. It weakens the enemy from within… causing unrest in the
masses. Write this down. Terrorism is not an expression of rage. Terrorism is a political weapon.
Remove a government’s façade of infallibility, and you remove its people’s faith.”
Loss of faith …
Is that what this was all about? Langdon wondered how Christians of the world would react to
cardinals being laid out like mutilated dogs. If the faith of a canonized priest did not protect him
from the evils of Satan, what hope was there for the rest of us? Langdon’s head was pounding
louder now… tiny voices playing tug of war.
Faith does not protect you. Medicine and airbags … those are things that protect you . God
does not protect you . Intelligence protects you . Enlightenment . Put your faith in something with
tangible results . How long has it been since someone walked on water? Modern miracles belong to
science … computers, vaccines, space stations … even the divine miracle of creation . Matter from
nothing … in a lab . Who needs God? No! Science is God .
The killer’s voice resonated in Langdon’s mind. Midnight … mathematical progression of
death … sacrifici vergini nell’ altare di scienza .”
Then suddenly, like a crowd dispersed by a single gunshot, the voices were gone.
Robert Langdon bolted to his feet. His chair fell backward and crashed on the marble floor.
Vittoria and the camerlegno jumped.
“I missed it,” Langdon whispered, spellbound. “It was right in front of me…”
“Missed what?” Vittoria demanded.
Langdon turned to the priest. “Father, for three years I have petitioned this office for access to
the Vatican Archives. I have been denied seven times.”
“Mr. Langdon, I am sorry, but this hardly seems the moment to raise such complaints.”
“I need access immediately. The four missing cardinals. I may be able to figure out where
they’re going to be killed.”
Vittoria stared, looking certain she had misunderstood.
The camerlegno looked troubled, as if he were the brunt of a cruel joke. “You expect me to
believe this information is in our archives ?”
“I can’t promise I can locate it in time, but if you let me in…”
“Mr. Langdon, I am due in the Sistine Chapel in four minutes. The archives are across
Vatican City.”
“You’re serious aren’t you?” Vittoria interrupted, staring deep into Langdon’s eyes, seeming
to sense his earnestness.
“Hardly a joking time,” Langdon said.
“Father,” Vittoria said, turning to the camerlegno, “if there’s a chance… any at all of finding
where these killings are going to happen, we could stake out the locations and–”
“But the archives?” the camerlegno insisted. “How could they possibly contain any clue?”
“Explaining it,” Langdon said, “will take longer than you’ve got. But if I’m right, we can use
the information to catch the Hassassin.”
The camerlegno looked as though he wanted to believe but somehow could not.
“Christianity’s most sacred codices are in that archive. Treasures I myself am not privileged enough
to see.”
“I am aware of that.”
“Access is permitted only by written decree of the curator and the Board of Vatican
Librarians.”
“Or ,” Langdon declared, “by papal mandate. It says so in every rejection letter your curator
ever sent me.”
The camerlegno nodded.
“Not to be rude,” Langdon urged, “but if I’m not mistaken a papal mandate comes from this
office. As far as I can tell, tonight you hold the trust of his station. Considering the
circumstances…”
The camerlegno pulled a pocket watch from his cassock and looked at it. “Mr. Langdon, I am
prepared to give my life tonight, quite literally, to save this church.”
Langdon sensed nothing but truth in the man’s eyes.
“This document,” the camerlegno said, “do you truly believe it is here? And that it can help us
locate these four churches?”
“I would not have made countless solicitations for access if I were not convinced. Italy is a bit
far to come on a lark when you make a teacher’s salary. The document you have is an ancient–”
“Please,” the camerlegno interrupted. “Forgive me. My mind cannot process any more details
at the moment. Do you know where the secret archives are located?”
Langdon felt a rush of excitement. “Just behind the Santa Ana Gate.”
“Impressive. Most scholars believe it is through the secret door behind St. Peter’s Throne.”
“No. That would be the Archivio della Reverenda di Fabbrica di S. Pietro. A common
misconception.”
“A librarian docent accompanies every entrant at all times. Tonight, the docents are gone.
What you are requesting is carte blanche access . Not even our cardinals enter alone.”
“I will treat your treasures with the utmost respect and care. Your librarians will find not a
trace that I was there.”
Overhead the bells of St. Peter’s began to toll. The camerlegno checked his pocket watch. “I
must go.” He paused a taut moment and looked up at Langdon. “I will have a Swiss Guard meet
you at the archives. I am giving you my trust, Mr. Langdon. Go now.”
Langdon was speechless.
The young priest now seemed to possess an eerie poise. Reaching over, he squeezed
Langdon’s shoulder with surprising strength. “I want you to find what you are looking for. And find
it quickly.”
46
The Secret Vatican Archives are located at the far end of the Borgia Courtyard directly up a
hill from the Gate of Santa Ana. They contain over 20,000 volumes and are rumored to hold such
treasures as Leonardo da Vinci’s missing diaries and even unpublished books of the Holy Bible.
Langdon strode powerfully up the deserted Via della Fondamenta toward the archives, his
mind barely able to accept that he was about to be granted access. Vittoria was at his side, keeping
pace effortlessly. Her almond-scented hair tossed lightly in the breeze, and Langdon breathed it in.
He felt his thoughts straying and reeled himself back.
Vittoria said, “You going to tell me what we’re looking for?”
“A little book written by a guy named Galileo.”
She sounded surprised. “You don’t mess around. What’s in it?”
“It is supposed to contain something called il segno .”
“The sign?”
“Sign, clue, signal… depends on your translation.”
“Sign to what ?”
Langdon picked up the pace. “A secret location. Galileo’s Illuminati needed to protect
themselves from the Vatican, so they founded an ultrasecret Illuminati meeting place here in Rome.
They called it The Church of Illumination.”
“Pretty bold calling a satanic lair a church .”
Langdon shook his head. “Galileo’s Illuminati were not the least bit satanic. They were
scientists who revered enlightenment. Their meeting place was simply where they could safely
congregate and discuss topics forbidden by the Vatican. Although we know the secret lair existed,
to this day nobody has ever located it.”
“Sounds like the Illuminati know how to keep a secret.”
“Absolutely. In fact, they never revealed the location of their hideaway to anyone outside the
brotherhood. This secrecy protected them, but it also posed a problem when it came to recruiting
new members.”
“They couldn’t grow if they couldn’t advertise,” Vittoria said, her legs and mind keeping
perfect pace.
“Exactly. Word of Galileo’s brotherhood started to spread in the 1630s, and scientists from
around the world made secret pilgrimages to Rome hoping to join the Illuminati… eager for a
chance to look through Galileo’s telescope and hear the master’s ideas. Unfortunately, though,
because of the Illuminati’s secrecy, scientists arriving in Rome never knew where to go for the
meetings or to whom they could safely speak. The Illuminati wanted new blood, but they could not
afford to risk their secrecy by making their whereabouts known.”
Vittoria frowned. “Sounds like a situazione senza soluzione .”
“Exactly. A catch-22, as we would say.”
“So what did they do?”
“They were scientists. They examined the problem and found a solution. A brilliant one,
actually. The Illuminati created a kind of ingenious map directing scientists to their sanctuary.”
Vittoria looked suddenly skeptical and slowed. “A map? Sounds careless. If a copy fell into
the wrong hands…”
“It couldn’t,” Langdon said. “No copies existed anywhere. It was not the kind of map that fit
on paper. It was enormous. A blazed trail of sorts across the city.”
Vittoria slowed even further. “Arrows painted on sidewalks?”
“In a sense, yes, but much more subtle. The map consisted of a series of carefully concealed
symbolic markers placed in public locations around the city. One marker led to the next… and the
next… a trail… eventually leading to the Illuminati lair.”
Vittoria eyed him askance. “Sounds like a treasure hunt.”
Langdon chuckled. “In a manner of speaking, it is. The Illuminati called their string of
markers ‘The Path of Illumination,’ and anyone who wanted to join the brotherhood had to follow it
all the way to the end. A kind of test.”
“But if the Vatican wanted to find the Illuminati,” Vittoria argued, “couldn’t they simply
follow the markers?”
“No. The path was hidden. A puzzle, constructed in such a way that only certain people would
have the ability to track the markers and figure out where the Illuminati church was hidden. The
Illuminati intended it as a kind of initiation, functioning not only as a security measure but also as a
screening process to ensure that only the brightest scientists arrived at their door.”
“I don’t buy it. In the 1600s the clergy were some of the most educated men in the world. If
these markers were in public locations, certainly there existed members of the Vatican who could
have figured it out.”
“Sure,” Langdon said, “if they had known about the markers. But they didn’t. And they
never noticed them because the Illuminati designed them in such a way that clerics would never
suspect what they were. They used a method known in symbology as dissimulation .”
“Camouflage.”
Langdon was impressed. “You know the term.”
“Dissimulacione ,” she said. “Nature’s best defense. Try spotting a trumpet fish floating
vertically in seagrass.”
“Okay,” Langdon said. “The Illuminati used the same concept. They created markers that
faded into the backdrop of ancient Rome. They couldn’t use ambigrams or scientific symbology
because it would be far too conspicuous, so they called on an Illuminati artist–the same anonymous
prodigy who had created their ambigrammatic symbol ‘Illuminati’–and they commissioned him to
carve four sculptures.”
“Illuminati sculptures ?”
“Yes, sculptures with two strict guidelines. First, the sculptures had to look like the rest of the
artwork in Rome… artwork that the Vatican would never suspect belonged to the Illuminati.”
“Religious art.”
Langdon nodded, feeling a tinge of excitement, talking faster now. “And the second
guideline was that the four sculptures had to have very specific themes. Each piece needed to be a
subtle tribute to one of the four elements of science.”
“Four elements?” Vittoria said. “There are over a hundred.”
“Not in the 1600s,” Langdon reminded her. “Early alchemists believed the entire universe was
made up of only four substances: Earth, Air, Fire, and Water.”
The early cross, Langdon knew, was the most common symbol of the four elements–four
arms representing Earth, Air, Fire, and Water. Beyond that, though, there existed literally dozens
of symbolic occurrences of Earth, Air, Fire, and Water throughout history–the Pythagorean cycles
of life, the Chinese Hong-Fan , the Jungian male and female rudiments, the quadrants of the Zodiac,
even the Muslims revered the four ancient elements… although in Islam they were known as
“squares, clouds, lightning, and waves.” For Langdon, though, it was a more modern usage that
always gave him chills–the Mason’s four mystic grades of Absolute Initiation: Earth, Air, Fire, and
Water.
Vittoria seemed mystified. “So this Illuminati artist created four pieces of art that looked
religious, but were actually tributes to Earth, Air, Fire, and Water?”
“Exactly,” Langdon said, quickly turning up Via Sentinel toward the archives. “The pieces
blended into the sea of religious artwork all over Rome. By donating the artwork anonymously to
specific churches and then using their political influence, the brotherhood facilitated placement of
these four pieces in carefully chosen churches in Rome. Each piece of course was a marker… subtly
pointing to the next church… where the next marker awaited. It functioned as a trail of clues
disguised as religious art. If an Illuminati candidate could find the first church and the marker for
Earth, he could follow it to Air… and then to Fire… and then to Water… and finally to the Church
of Illumination.”
Vittoria was looking less and less clear. “And this has something to do with catching the
Illuminati assassin?”
Langdon smiled as he played his ace. “Oh, yes. The Illuminati called these four churches by a
very special name. The Altars of Science .”
Vittoria frowned. “I’m sorry, that means noth–” She stopped short. “L’altare di scienza?” she
exclaimed. “The Illuminati assassin. He warned that the cardinals would be virgin sacrifices on the
altars of science!”
Langdon gave her a smile. “Four cardinals. Four churches. The four altars of science.”
She looked stunned. “You’re saying the four churches where the cardinals will be sacrificed
are the same four churches that mark the ancient Path of Illumination?”
“I believe so, yes.”
“But why would the killer have given us that clue?”
“Why not?” Langdon replied. “Very few historians know about these sculptures. Even fewer
believe they exist. And their locations have remained secret for four hundred years. No doubt the
Illuminati trusted the secret for another five hours. Besides, the Illuminati don’t need their Path of
Illumination anymore. Their secret lair is probably long gone anyway. They live in the modern
world. They meet in bank boardrooms, eating clubs, private golf courses. Tonight they want to
make their secrets public. This is their moment. Their grand unveiling.”
Langdon feared the Illuminati unveiling would have a special symmetry to it that he had not
yet mentioned. The four brands . The killer had sworn each cardinal would be branded with a
different symbol. Proof the ancient legends are true , the killer had said. The legend of the four
ambigrammatic brands was as old as the Illuminati itself: earth, air, fire, water–four words crafted
in perfect symmetry. Just like the word Illuminati. Each cardinal was to be branded with one of the
ancient elements of science. The rumor that the four brands were in English rather than Italian
remained a point of debate among historians. English seemed a random deviation from their natural
tongue… and the Illuminati did nothing randomly.
Langdon turned up the brick pathway before the archive building. Ghastly images thrashed in
his mind. The overall Illuminati plot was starting to reveal its patient grandeur. The brotherhood
had vowed to stay silent as long as it took, amassing enough influence and power that they could
resurface without fear, make their stand, fight their cause in broad daylight. The Illuminati were no
longer about hiding. They were about flaunting their power, confirming the conspiratorial myths as
fact. Tonight was a global publicity stunt.
Vittoria said, “Here comes our escort.” Langdon looked up to see a Swiss Guard hurrying
across an adjacent lawn toward the front door.
When the guard saw them, he stopped in his tracks. He stared at them, as though he thought
he was hallucinating. Without a word he turned away and pulled out his walkie-talkie. Apparently
incredulous at what he was being asked to do, the guard spoke urgently to the person on the other
end. The angry bark coming back was indecipherable to Langdon, but its message was clear. The
guard slumped, put away the walkie-talkie, and turned to them with a look of discontent.
Not a word was spoken as the guard guided them into the building. They passed through four
steel doors, two passkey entries, down a long stairwell, and into a foyer with two combination
keypads. Passing through a high-tech series of electronic gates, they arrived at the end of a long
hallway outside a set of wide oak double doors. The guard stopped, looked them over again and,
mumbling under his breath, walked to a metal box on the wall. He unlocked it, reached inside, and
pressed a code. The doors before them buzzed, and the deadbolt fell open.
The guard turned, speaking to them for the first time. “The archives are beyond that door. I
have been instructed to escort you this far and return for briefing on another matter.”
“You’re leaving?” Vittoria demanded.
“Swiss Guards are not cleared for access to the Secret Archives. You are here only because
my commander received a direct order from the camerlegno.”
“But how do we get out ?”
“Monodirectional security. You will have no difficulties.” That being the entirety of the
conversation, the guard spun on his heel and marched off down the hall.
Vittoria made some comment, but Langdon did not hear. His mind was fixed on the double
doors before him, wondering what mysteries lay beyond.
47
Although he knew time was short, Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca walked slowly. He needed
the time alone to gather his thoughts before facing opening prayer. So much was happening. As he
moved in dim solitude down the Northern Wing, the challenge of the past fifteen days weighed
heavy in his bones.
He had followed his holy duties to the letter.
As was Vatican tradition, following the Pope’s death the camerlegno had personally
confirmed expiration by placing his fingers on the Pope’s carotid artery, listening for breath, and
then calling the Pope’s name three times. By law there was no autopsy. Then he had sealed the
Pope’s bedroom, destroyed the papal fisherman’s ring, shattered the die used to make lead seals,
and arranged for the funeral. That done, he began preparations for the conclave.
Conclave , he thought. The final hurdle . It was one of the oldest traditions in Christendom.
Nowadays, because the outcome of conclave was usually known before it began, the process was
criticized as obsolete–more of a burlesque than an election. The camerlegno knew, however, this
was only a lack of understanding. Conclave was not an election. It was an ancient, mystic
transference of power. The tradition was timeless… the secrecy, the folded slips of paper, the
burning of the ballots, the mixing of ancient chemicals, the smoke signals.
As the camerlegno approached through the Loggias of Gregory XIII, he wondered if Cardinal
Mortati was in a panic yet. Certainly Mortati had noticed the preferiti were missing. Without them,
the voting would go on all night. Mortati’s appointment as the Great Elector, the camerlegno
assured himself, was a good one. The man was a freethinker and could speak his mind. The
conclave would need a leader tonight more than ever.
As the camerlegno arrived at the top of the Royal Staircase, he felt as though he were standing
on the precipice of his life. Even from up here he could hear the rumble of activity in the Sistine
Chapel below–the uneasy chatter of 165 cardinals.
One hundred sixty-one cardinals , he corrected.
For an instant the camerlegno was falling, plummeting toward hell, people screaming, flames
engulfing him, stones and blood raining from the sky.
And then silence.
When the child awoke, he was in heaven. Everything around him was white. The light was
blinding and pure. Although some would say a ten year old could not possibly understand heaven,
the young Carlo Ventresca understood heaven very well. He was in heaven right now. Where else
would he be? Even in his short decade on earth Carlo had felt the majesty of God–the thundering
pipe organs, the towering domes, the voices raised in song, the stained glass, shimmering bronze
and gold. Carlo’s mother, Maria, brought him to Mass every day. The church was Carlo’s home.
“Why do we come to Mass every single day?” Carlo asked, not that he minded at all.
“Because I promised God I would,” she replied. “And a promise to God is the most important
promise of all. Never break a promise to God.”
Carlo promised her he would never break a promise to God. He loved his mother more than
anything in the world. She was his holy angel. Sometimes he called her Maria benedetta –the
Blessed Mary–although she did not like that at all. He knelt with her as she prayed, smelling the
sweet scent of her flesh and listening to the murmur of her voice as she counted the rosary. Hail
Mary, Mother of God … pray for us sinners … now and at the hour of our death .
“Where is my father?” Carlo asked, already knowing his father had died before he was born.
“God is your father, now,” she would always reply. “You are a child of the church.”
Carlo loved that.
“Whenever you feel frightened,” she said, “remember that God is your father now. He will
watch over you and protect you forever. God has big plans for you, Carlo.” The boy knew she was
right. He could already feel God in his blood.
Blood…
Blood raining from the sky!
Silence. Then heaven.
His heaven, Carlo learned as the blinding lights were turned off, was actually the Intensive
Care Unit in Santa Clara Hospital outside of Palermo. Carlo had been the sole survivor of a
terrorist bombing that had collapsed a chapel where he and his mother had been attending Mass
while on vacation. Thirty-seven people had died, including Carlo’s mother. The papers called
Carlo’s survival The Miracle of St . Francis . Carlo had, for some unknown reason, only moments
before the blast, left his mother’s side and ventured into a protected alcove to ponder a tapestry
depicting the story of St. Francis.
God called me there , he decided. He wanted to save me .
Carlo was delirious with pain. He could still see his mother, kneeling at the pew, blowing him
a kiss, and then with a concussive roar, her sweet-smelling flesh was torn apart. He could still taste
man’s evil . Blood showered down. His mother’s blood! The blessed Maria!
God will watch over you and protect you forever , his mother had told him.
But where was God now!
Then, like a worldly manifestation of his mother’s truth, a clergyman had come to the
hospital. He was not any clergyman. He was a bishop. He prayed over Carlo. The Miracle of St.
Francis. When Carlo recovered, the bishop arranged for him to live in a small monastery attached to
the cathedral over which the bishop presided. Carlo lived and tutored with the monks. He even
became an altar boy for his new protector. The bishop suggested Carlo enter public school, but
Carlo refused. He could not have been more happy with his new home. He now truly lived in the
house of God.
Every night Carlo prayed for his mother.
God saved me for a reason , he thought. What is the reason?
When Carlo turned sixteen, he was obliged by Italian law to serve two years of reserve
military training. The bishop told Carlo that if he entered seminary he would be exempt from this
duty. Carlo told the priest that he planned to enter seminary but that first he needed to understand
evil .
The bishop did not understand.
Carlo told him that if he was going to spend his life in the church fighting evil, first he had to
understand it. He could not think of any better place to understand evil than in the army. The army
used guns and bombs. A bomb killed my Blessed mother!
The bishop tried to dissuade him, but Carlo’s mind was made up.
“Be careful, my son,” the bishop had said. “And remember the church awaits you when you
return.”
Carlo’s two years of military service had been dreadful. Carlo’s youth had been one of silence
and reflection. But in the army there was no quiet for reflection. Endless noise. Huge machines
everywhere. Not a moment of peace. Although the soldiers went to Mass once a week at the
barracks, Carlo did not sense God’s presence in any of his fellow soldiers. Their minds were too
filled with chaos to see God.
Carlo hated his new life and wanted to go home. But he was determined to stick it out. He had
yet to understand evil. He refused to fire a gun, so the military taught him how to fly a medical
helicopter. Carlo hated the noise and the smell, but at least it let him fly up in the sky and be closer
to his mother in heaven. When he was informed his pilot’s training included learning how to
parachute, Carlo was terrified. Still, he had no choice.
God will protect me , he told himself.
Carlo’s first parachute jump was the most exhilarating physical experience of his life. It was
like flying with God. Carlo could not get enough… the silence… the floating… seeing his mother’s
face in the billowing white clouds as he soared to earth. God has plans for you, Carlo . When he
returned from the military, Carlo entered the seminary.
That had been twenty-three years ago.
Now, as Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca descended the Royal Staircase, he tried to comprehend
the chain of events that had delivered him to this extraordinary crossroads.
Abandon all fear , he told himself, and give this night over to God .
He could see the great bronze door of the Sistine Chapel now, dutifully protected by four
Swiss Guards. The guards unbolted the door and pulled it open. Inside, every head turned. The
camerlegno gazed out at the black robes and red sashes before him. He understood what God’s
plans for him were. The fate of the church had been placed in his hands.
The camerlegno crossed himself and stepped over the threshold.
48
BBC journalist Gunther Glick sat sweating in the BBC network van parked on the eastern
edge of St. Peter’s Square and cursed his assignment editor. Although Glick’s first monthly review
had come back filled with superlatives–resourceful, sharp, dependable–here he was in Vatican City
on “Pope-Watch.” He reminded himself that reporting for the BBC carried a hell of a lot more
credibility than fabricating fodder for the British Tattler , but still, this was not his idea of
reporting.
Glick’s assignment was simple. Insultingly simple. He was to sit here waiting for a bunch of
old farts to elect their next chief old fart, then he was to step outside and record a fifteen-second
“live” spot with the Vatican as a backdrop.
Brilliant .
Glick couldn’t believe the BBC still sent reporters into the field to cover this schlock. You
don’t see the American networks here tonight . Hell no! That was because the big boys did it right.
They watched CNN, synopsized it, and then filmed their “live” report in front of a blue screen,
superimposing stock video for a realistic backdrop. MSNBC even used in-studio wind and rain
machines to give that on-the-scene authenticity. Viewers didn’t want truth anymore; they wanted
entertainment.
Glick gazed out through the windshield and felt more and more depressed by the minute. The
imperial mountain of Vatican City rose before him as a dismal reminder of what men could
accomplish when they put their minds to it.
“What have I accomplished in my life?” he wondered aloud. “Nothing.”
“So give up,” a woman’s voice said from behind him.
Glick jumped. He had almost forgotten he was not alone. He turned to the back seat, where
his camerawoman, Chinita Macri, sat silently polishing her glasses. She was always polishing her
glasses. Chinita was black, although she preferred African American, a little heavy, and smart as
hell. She wouldn’t let you forget it either. She was an odd bird, but Glick liked her. And Glick could
sure as hell use the company.
“What’s the problem, Gunth?” Chinita asked.
“What are we doing here?”
She kept polishing. “Witnessing an exciting event.”
“Old men locked in the dark is exciting?”
“You do know you’re going to hell, don’t you?”
“Already there.”
“Talk to me.” She sounded like his mother.
“I just feel like I want to leave my mark.”
“You wrote for the British Tattler .”
“Yeah, but nothing with any resonance.”
“Oh, come on, I heard you did a groundbreaking article on the queen’s secret sex life with
aliens.”
“Thanks.”
“Hey, things are looking up. Tonight you make your first fifteen seconds of TV history.”
Glick groaned. He could hear the news anchor already. “Thanks Gunther, great report.” Then
the anchor would roll his eyes and move on to the weather. “I should have tried for an anchor spot.”
Macri laughed. “With no experience? And that beard? Forget it.”
Glick ran his hands through the reddish gob of hair on his chin. “I think it makes me look
clever.”
The van’s cell phone rang, mercifully interrupting yet another one of Glick’s failures. “Maybe
that’s editorial,” he said, suddenly hopeful. “You think they want a live update?”
“On this story?” Macri laughed. “You keep dreaming.”
Glick answered the phone in his best anchorman voice. “Gunther Glick, BBC, Live in Vatican
City.”
The man on the line had a thick Arabic accent. “Listen carefully,” he said. “I am about to
change your life.”
49
Langdon and Vittoria stood alone now outside the double doors that led to the inner sanctum
of the Secret Archives. The decor in the colonnade was an incongruous mix of wall-to-wall carpets
over marble floors and wireless security cameras gazing down from beside carved cherubs in the
ceiling. Langdon dubbed it Sterile Renaissance . Beside the arched ingress hung a small bronze
plaque.
ARCHIVIO VATICANO
Curatore: Padre Jaqui Tomaso
Father Jaqui Tomaso . Langdon recognized the curator’s name from the rejection letters at
home in his desk.
Dear Mr. Langdon, It is with regret that I am writing to deny…
Regret. Bullshit . Since Jaqui Tomaso’s reign had begun, Langdon had never met a single
non-Catholic American scholar who had been given access to the Secret Vatican Archives. Il
gaurdiano , historians called him. Jaqui Tomaso was the toughest librarian on earth.
As Langdon pushed the doors open and stepped through the vaulted portal into the inner
sanctum, he half expected to see Father Jaqui in full military fatigues and helmet standing guard
with a bazooka. The space, however, was deserted.
Silence. Soft lighting.
Archivio Vaticano . One of his life dreams.
As Langdon’s eyes took in the sacred chamber, his first reaction was one of embarrassment.
He realized what a callow romantic he was. The images he had held for so many years of this room
could not have been more inaccurate. He had imagined dusty bookshelves piled high with tattered
volumes, priests cataloging by the light of candles and stained-glass windows, monks poring over
scrolls…
Not even close.
At first glance the room appeared to be a darkened airline hangar in which someone had built
a dozen free-standing racquetball courts. Langdon knew of course what the glass-walled enclosures
were. He was not surprised to see them; humidity and heat eroded ancient vellums and parchments,
and proper preservation required hermitic vaults like these–airtight cubicles that kept out humidity
and natural acids in the air. Langdon had been inside hermetic vaults many times, but it was always
an unsettling experience… something about entering an airtight container where the oxygen was
regulated by a reference librarian.
The vaults were dark, ghostly even, faintly outlined by tiny dome lights at the end of each
stack. In the blackness of each cell, Langdon sensed the phantom giants, row upon row of towering
stacks, laden with history. This was one hell of a collection.
Vittoria also seemed dazzled. She stood beside him staring mutely at the giant transparent
cubes.
Time was short, and Langdon wasted none of it scanning the dimly lit room for a book
catalog–a bound encyclopedia that cataloged the library’s collection. All he saw was the glow of a
handful of computer terminals dotting the room. “Looks like they’ve got a Biblion. Their index is
computerized.”
Vittoria looked hopeful. “That should speed things up.”
Langdon wished he shared her enthusiasm, but he sensed this was bad news. He walked to a
terminal and began typing. His fears were instantly confirmed. “The old-fashioned method would
have been better.”
“Why?”
He stepped back from the monitor. “Because real books don’t have password protection. I
don’t suppose physicists are natural born hackers?”
Vittoria shook her head. “I can open oysters, that’s about it.”
Langdon took a deep breath and turned to face the eerie collection of diaphanous vaults. He
walked to the nearest one and squinted into the dim interior. Inside the glass were amorphous
shapes Langdon recognized as the usual bookshelves, parchment bins, and examination tables. He
looked up at the indicator tabs glowing at the end of each stack. As in all libraries, the tabs indicated
the contents of that row. He read the headings as he moved down the transparent barrier.
Pietro Il Erimito… Le Crociate… Urbano II… Levant…
“They’re labeled,” he said, still walking. “But it’s not alpha-author.” He wasn’t surprised.
Ancient archives were almost never cataloged alphabetically because so many of the authors were
unknown. Titles didn’t work either because many historical documents were untitled letters or
parchment fragments. Most cataloging was done chronologically. Disconcertingly, however, this
arrangement did not appear to be chronological.
Langdon felt precious time already slipping away. “Looks like the Vatican has its own
system.”
“What a surprise.”
He examined the labels again. The documents spanned centuries, but all the keywords, he
realized, were interrelated. “I think it’s a thematic classification.”
“Thematic?” Vittoria said, sounding like a disapproving scientist. “Sounds inefficient.”
Actually … Langdon thought, considering it more closely. This may be the shrewdest
cataloging I’ve ever seen . He had always urged his students to understand the overall tones and
motifs of an artistic period rather than getting lost in the minutia of dates and specific works. The
Vatican Archives, it seemed, were cataloged on a similar philosophy. Broad strokes …
“Everything in this vault,” Langdon said, feeling more confident now, “centuries of material,
has to do with the Crusades. That’s this vault’s theme.” It was all here, he realized. Historical
accounts, letters, artwork, socio-political data, modern analyses . All in one place … encouraging a
deeper understanding of a topic . Brilliant .
Vittoria frowned. “But data can relate to multiple themes simultaneously.”
“Which is why they cross-reference with proxy markers.” Langdon pointed through the glass
to the colorful plastic tabs inserted among the documents. “Those indicate secondary documents
located elsewhere with their primary themes.”
“Sure,” she said, apparently letting it go. She put her hands on her hips and surveyed the
enormous space. Then she looked at Langdon. “So, Professor, what’s the name of this Galileo thing
we’re looking for?”
Langdon couldn’t help but smile. He still couldn’t fathom that he was standing in this room.
It’s in here , he thought. Somewhere in the dark, it’s waiting .
“Follow me,” Langdon said. He started briskly down the first aisle, examining the indicator
tabs of each vault. “Remember how I told you about the Path of Illumination? How the Illuminati
recruited new members using an elaborate test?”
“The treasure hunt,” Vittoria said, following closely.
“The challenge the Illuminati had was that after they placed the markers, they needed some
way to tell the scientific community the path existed.”
“Logical,” Vittoria said. “Otherwise nobody would know to look for it.”
“Yes, and even if they knew the path existed, scientists would have no way of knowing
where the path began. Rome is huge.”
“Okay.”
Langdon proceeded down the next aisle, scanning the tabs as he talked. “About fifteen years
ago, some historians at the Sorbonne and I uncovered a series of Illuminati letters filled with
references to the segno .”
“The sign. The announcement about the path and where it began.”
“Yes. And since then, plenty of Illuminati academics, myself included, have uncovered other
references to the segno . It is accepted theory now that the clue exists and that Galileo mass
distributed it to the scientific community without the Vatican ever knowing.”
“How?”
“We’re not sure, but most likely printed publications. He published many books and
newsletters over the years.”
“That the Vatican no doubt saw. Sounds dangerous.”
“True. Nonetheless the segno was distributed.”
“But nobody has ever actually found it?”
“No. Oddly though, wherever allusions to the segno appear–Masonic diaries, ancient
scientific journals, Illuminati letters–it is often referred to by a number.”
“666?”
Langdon smiled. “Actually it’s 503.”
“Meaning?”
“None of us could ever figure it out. I became fascinated with 503, trying everything to find
meaning in the number–numerology, map references, latitudes.” Langdon reached the end of the
aisle, turned the corner, and hurried to scan the next row of tabs as he spoke. “For many years the
only clue seemed to be that 503 began with the number five… one of the sacred Illuminati digits.”
He paused.
“Something tells me you recently figured it out, and that’s why we’re here.”
“Correct,” Langdon said, allowing himself a rare moment of pride in his work. “Are you
familiar with a book by Galileo called Diàlogo ?”
“Of course. Famous among scientists as the ultimate scientific sellout.”
Sellout wasn’t quite the word Langdon would have used, but he knew what Vittoria meant.
In the early 1630s, Galileo had wanted to publish a book endorsing the Copernican heliocentric
model of the solar system, but the Vatican would not permit the book’s release unless Galileo
included equally persuasive evidence for the church’s geo centric model–a model Galileo knew to
be dead wrong. Galileo had no choice but to acquiesce to the church’s demands and publish a book
giving equal time to both the accurate and inaccurate models.
“As you probably know,” Langdon said, “despite Galileo’s compromise, Diàlogo was still
seen as heretical, and the Vatican placed him under house arrest.”
“No good deed goes unpunished.”
Langdon smiled. “So true. And yet Galileo was persistent. While under house arrest, he
secretly wrote a lesser-known manuscript that scholars often confuse with Diàlogo . That book is
called Discorsi .”
Vittoria nodded. “I’ve heard of it. Discourses on the Tides .”
Langdon stopped short, amazed she had heard of the obscure publication about planetary
motion and its effect on the tides.
“Hey,” she said, “you’re talking to an Italian marine physicist whose father worshiped
Galileo.”
Langdon laughed. Discorsi however was not what they were looking for. Langdon explained
that Discorsi had not been Galileo’s only work while under house arrest. Historians believed he
had also written an obscure booklet called Diagramma .
“Diagramma della Verità ,” Langdon said. “Diagram of Truth .”
“Never heard of it.”
“I’m not surprised. Diagramma was Galileo’s most secretive work–supposedly some sort of
treatise on scientific facts he held to be true but was not allowed to share. Like some of Galileo’s
previous manuscripts, Diagramma was smuggled out of Rome by a friend and quietly published in
Holland. The booklet became wildly popular in the European scientific underground. Then the
Vatican caught wind of it and went on a book-burning campaign.”
Vittoria now looked intrigued. “And you think Diagramma contained the clue? The segno .
The information about the Path of Illumination.”
“Diagramma is how Galileo got the word out. That I’m sure of.” Langdon entered the third
row of vaults and continued surveying the indicator tabs. “Archivists have been looking for a copy
of Diagramma for years. But between the Vatican burnings and the booklet’s low permanence
rating, the booklet has disappeared off the face of the earth.”
“Permanence rating?”
“Durability. Archivists rate documents one through ten for their structural integrity.
Diagramma was printed on sedge papyrus. It’s like tissue paper. Life span of no more than a
century.”
“Why not something stronger?”
“Galileo’s behest. To protect his followers. This way any scientists caught with a copy could
simply drop it in water and the booklet would dissolve. It was great for destruction of evidence, but
terrible for archivists. It is believed that only one copy of Diagramma survived beyond the
eighteenth century.”
“One?” Vittoria looked momentarily starstruck as she glanced around the room. “And it’s
here ?”
“Confiscated from the Netherlands by the Vatican shortly after Galileo’s death. I’ve been
petitioning to see it for years now. Ever since I realized what was in it.”
As if reading Langdon’s mind, Vittoria moved across the aisle and began scanning the
adjacent bay of vaults, doubling their pace.
“Thanks,” he said. “Look for reference tabs that have anything to do with Galileo, science,
scientists. You’ll know it when you see it.”
“Okay, but you still haven’t told me how you figured out Diagramma contained the clue. It
had something to do with the number you kept seeing in Illuminati letters? 503?”
Langdon smiled. “Yes. It took some time, but I finally figured out that 503 is a simple code. It
clearly points to Diagramma .”
For an instant Langdon relived his moment of unexpected revelation: August 16. Two years
ago. He was standing lakeside at the wedding of the son of a colleague. Bagpipes droned on the
water as the wedding party made their unique entrance… across the lake on a barge. The craft was
festooned with flowers and wreaths. It carried a Roman numeral painted proudly on the hull–DCII.
Puzzled by the marking Langdon asked the father of the bride, “What’s with 602?”
“602?”
Langdon pointed to the barge. “DCII is the Roman numeral for 602.”
The man laughed. “That’s not a Roman numeral. That’s the name of the barge.”
“The DCII?”
The man nodded. “The Dick and Connie II .”
Langdon felt sheepish. Dick and Connie were the wedding couple. The barge obviously had
been named in their honor. “What happened to the DCI ?”
The man groaned. “It sank yesterday during the rehearsal luncheon.”
Langdon laughed. “Sorry to hear that.” He looked back out at the barge. The DCII , he
thought. Like a miniature QEII . A second later, it had hit him.
Now Langdon turned to Vittoria. “503,” he said, “as I mentioned, is a code. It’s an Illuminati
trick for concealing what was actually intended as a Roman numeral. The number 503 in Roman
numerals is–”
“DIII.”
Langdon glanced up. “That was fast. Please don’t tell me you’re an Illuminata.”
She laughed. “I use Roman numerals to codify pelagic strata.”
Of course , Langdon thought. Don’t we all .
Vittoria looked over. “So what is the meaning of DIII?”
“DI and DII and DIII are very old abbreviations. They were used by ancient scientists to
distinguish between the three Galilean documents most commonly confused.
Vittoria drew a quick breath. “Diàlogo … Discorsi … Diagramma .”
“D-one. D-two. D-three. All scientific. All controversial. 503 is DIII. Diagramma . The third
of his books.”
Vittoria looked troubled. “But one thing still doesn’t make sense. If this segno , this clue, this
advertisement about the Path of Illumination was really in Galileo’s Diagramma , why didn’t the
Vatican see it when they repossessed all the copies?”
“They may have seen it and not noticed. Remember the Illuminati markers? Hiding things in
plain view? Dissimulation? The segno apparently was hidden the same way–in plain view.
Invisible to those who were not looking for it. And also invisible to those who didn’t understand
it.”
“Meaning?”
“Meaning Galileo hid it well. According to historic record, the segno was revealed in a mode
the Illuminati called lingua pura .”
“The pure language?”
“Yes.”
“Mathematics?”
“That’s my guess. Seems pretty obvious. Galileo was a scientist after all, and he was writing
for scientists. Math would be a logical language in which to lay out the clue. The booklet is called
Diagramma , so mathematical diagrams may also be part of the code.”
Vittoria sounded only slightly more hopeful. “I suppose Galileo could have created some sort
of mathematical code that went unnoticed by the clergy.”
“You don’t sound sold,” Langdon said, moving down the row.
“I’m not. Mainly because you aren’t. If you were so sure about DIII, why didn’t you
publish? Then someone who did have access to the Vatican Archives could have come in here and
checked out Diagramma a long time ago.”
“I didn’t want to publish,” Langdon said. “I had worked hard to find the information and–”
He stopped himself, embarrassed.
“You wanted the glory .”
Langdon felt himself flush. “In a manner of speaking. It’s just that–”
“Don’t look so embarrassed. You’re talking to a scientist. Publish or perish. At CERN we call
it ‘Substantiate or suffocate.’ ”
“It wasn’t only wanting to be the first. I was also concerned that if the wrong people found out
about the information in Diagramma , it might disappear.”
“The wrong people being the Vatican?”
“Not that they are wrong, per se, but the church has always downplayed the Illuminati threat.
In the early 1900s the Vatican went so far as to say the Illuminati were a figment of overactive
imaginations. The clergy felt, and perhaps rightly so, that the last thing Christians needed to know
was that there was a very powerful anti-Christian movement infiltrating their banks, politics, and
universities.” Present tense, Robert , he reminded himself. There IS a powerful anti-Christian force
infiltrating their banks, politics, and universities .
“So you think the Vatican would have buried any evidence corroborating the Illuminati
threat?”
“Quite possibly. Any threat, real or imagined, weakens faith in the church’s power.”
“One more question.” Vittoria stopped short and looked at him like he was an alien. “Are you
serious ?”
Langdon stopped. “What do you mean?”
“I mean is this really your plan to save the day?”
Langdon wasn’t sure whether he saw amused pity or sheer terror in her eyes. “You mean
finding Diagramma? ”
“No, I mean finding Diagramma , locating a four-hundred-year-old segno , deciphering some
mathematical code, and following an ancient trail of art that only the most brilliant scientists in
history have ever been able to follow… all in the next four hours.”
Langdon shrugged. “I’m open to other suggestions.”
50
Robert Langdon stood outside Archive Vault 9 and read the labels on the stacks.
Brahe … Clavius … Copernicus … Kepler … Newton …
As he read the names again, he felt a sudden uneasiness. Here are the scientists … but where
is Galileo?
He turned to Vittoria, who was checking the contents of a nearby vault. “I found the right
theme, but Galileo’s missing.”
“No he isn’t,” she said, frowning as she motioned to the next vault. “He’s over here. But I
hope you brought your reading glasses, because this entire vault is his.”
Langdon ran over. Vittoria was right. Every indictor tab in Vault 10 carried the same
keyword.
Il Proceso Galileano
Langdon let out a low whistle, now realizing why Galileo had his own vault. “The Galileo
Affair,” he marveled, peering through the glass at the dark outlines of the stacks. “The longest and
most expensive legal proceeding in Vatican history. Fourteen years and six hundred million lire. It’s
all here.”
“Have a few legal documents.”
“I guess lawyers haven’t evolved much over the centuries.”
“Neither have sharks.”
Langdon strode to a large yellow button on the side of the vault. He pressed it, and a bank of
overhead lights hummed on inside. The lights were deep red, turning the cube into a glowing
crimson cell… a maze of towering shelves.
“My God,” Vittoria said, looking spooked. “Are we tanning or working?”
“Parchment and vellum fades, so vault lighting is always done with dark lights.”
“You could go mad in here.”
Or worse , Langdon thought, moving toward the vault’s sole entrance. “A quick word of
warning. Oxygen is an oxidant, so hermetic vaults contain very little of it. It’s a partial vacuum
inside. Your breathing will feel strained.”
“Hey, if old cardinals can survive it.”
True , Langdon thought. May we be as lucky .
The vault entrance was a single electronic revolving door. Langdon noted the common
arrangement of four access buttons on the door’s inner shaft, one accessible from each
compartment. When a button was pressed, the motorized door would kick into gear and make the
conventional half rotation before grinding to a halt–a standard procedure to preserve the integrity of
the inner atmosphere.
“After I’m in,” Langdon said, “just press the button and follow me through. There’s only
eight percent humidity inside, so be prepared to feel some dry mouth.”
Langdon stepped into the rotating compartment and pressed the button. The door buzzed
loudly and began to rotate. As he followed its motion, Langdon prepared his body for the physical
shock that always accompanied the first few seconds in a hermetic vault. Entering a sealed archive
was like going from sea level to 20,000 feet in an instant. Nausea and light-headedness were not
uncommon. Double vision, double over , he reminded himself, quoting the archivist’s mantra.
Langdon felt his ears pop. There was a hiss of air, and the door spun to a stop.
He was in.
Langdon’s first realization was that the air inside was thinner than he had anticipated. The
Vatican, it seemed, took their archives a bit more seriously than most. Langdon fought the gag
reflex and relaxed his chest while his pulmonary capillaries dilated. The tightness passed quickly.
Enter the Dolphin , he mused, gratified his fifty laps a day were good for something. Breathing
more normally now, he looked around the vault. Despite the transparent outer walls, he felt a
familiar anxiety. I’m in a box , he thought. A blood red box .
The door buzzed behind him, and Langdon turned to watch Vittoria enter. When she arrived
inside, her eyes immediately began watering, and she started breathing heavily.
“Give it a minute,” Langdon said. “If you get light-headed, bend over.”
“I… feel…” Vittoria choked, “like I’m… scuba diving… with the wrong… mixture.”
Langdon waited for her to acclimatize. He knew she would be fine. Vittoria Vetra was
obviously in terrific shape, nothing like the doddering ancient Radcliffe alumnae Langdon had once
squired through Widener Library’s hermetic vault. The tour had ended with Langdon giving
mouth-to-mouth to an old woman who’d almost aspirated her false teeth.
“Feeling better?” he asked.
Vittoria nodded.
“I rode your damn space plane, so I thought I owed you.”
This brought a smile. “Touché .”
Langdon reached into the box beside the door and extracted some white cotton gloves.
“Formal affair?” Vittoria asked.
“Finger acid. We can’t handle the documents without them. You’ll need a pair.”
Vittoria donned some gloves. “How long do we have?”
Langdon checked his Mickey Mouse watch. “It’s just past seven.”
“We have to find this thing within the hour.”
“Actually,” Langdon said, “we don’t have that kind of time.” He pointed overhead to a
filtered duct. “Normally the curator would turn on a reoxygenation system when someone is inside
the vault. Not today. Twenty minutes, we’ll both be sucking wind.”
Vittoria blanched noticeably in the reddish glow.
Langdon smiled and smoothed his gloves. “Substantiate or suffocate, Ms. Vetra. Mickey’s
ticking.”
51
BBC reporter Gunther Glick stared at the cell phone in his hand for ten seconds before he
finally hung up.
Chinita Macri studied him from the back of the van. “What happened? Who was that?”
Glick turned, feeling like a child who had just received a Christmas gift he feared was not
really for him. “I just got a tip. Something’s going on inside the Vatican.”
“It’s called conclave,” Chinita said. “Helluva tip.”
“No, something else.” Something big . He wondered if the story the caller had just told him
could possibly be true. Glick felt ashamed when he realized he was praying it was. “What if I told
you four cardinals have been kidnapped and are going to be murdered at different churches
tonight.”
“I’d say you’re being hazed by someone at the office with a sick sense of humor.”
“What if I told you we were going to be given the exact location of the first murder?”
“I’d want to know who the hell you just talked to.”
“He didn’t say.”
“Perhaps because he’s full of shit?”
Glick had come to expect Macri’s cynicism, but what she was forgetting was that liars and
lunatics had been Glick’s business for almost a decade at the British Tattler . This caller had been
neither. This man had been coldly sane. Logical. I will call you just before eight , the man had said,
and tell you where the first killing will occur . The images you record will make you famous . When
Glick had demanded why the caller was giving him this information, the answer had been as icy as
the man’s Mideastern accent. The media is the right arm of anarchy .
“He told me something else too,” Glick said.
“What? That Elvis Presley was just elected Pope?”
“Dial into the BBC database, will you?” Glick’s adrenaline was pumping now. “I want to see
what other stories we’ve run on these guys.”
“What guys?”
“Indulge me.”
Macri sighed and pulled up the connection to the BBC database. “This’ll take a minute.”
Glick’s mind was swimming. “The caller was very intent to know if I had a cameraman.”
“Videographer.”
“And if we could transmit live.”
“One point five three seven megahertz. What is this about?” The database beeped. “Okay,
we’re in. Who is it you’re looking for?”
Glick gave her the keyword.
Macri turned and stared. “I sure as hell hope you’re kidding.”
52
The internal organization of Archival Vault 10 was not as intuitive as Langdon had hoped,
and the Diagramma manuscript did not appear to be located with other similar Galilean
publications. Without access to the computerized Biblion and a reference locator, Langdon and
Vittoria were stuck.
“You’re sure Diagramma is in here?” Vittoria asked.
“Positive. It’s a confirmed listing in both the Uficcio della Propaganda delle Fede –”
“Fine. As long as you’re sure.” She headed left, while he went right.
Langdon began his manual search. He needed every bit of self-restraint not to stop and read
every treasure he passed. The collection was staggering. The Assayer … The Starry Messenger …
The Sunspot Letters … Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina … Apologia pro Galileo … On and
on.
It was Vittoria who finally struck gold near the back of the vault. Her throaty voice called out,
“Diagramma della Verità! ”
Langdon dashed through the crimson haze to join her. “Where?”
Vittoria pointed, and Langdon immediately realized why they had not found it earlier. The
manuscript was in a folio bin, not on the shelves. Folio bins were a common means of storing
unbound pages. The label on the front of the container left no doubt about the contents.
Diagramma Della Verità
Galileo Galilei, 1639
Langdon dropped to his knees, his heart pounding. “Diagramma .” He gave her a grin. “Nice
work. Help me pull out this bin.”
Vittoria knelt beside him, and they heaved. The metal tray on which the bin was sitting rolled
toward them on castors, revealing the top of the container.
“No lock?” Vittoria said, sounding surprised at the simple latch.
“Never. Documents sometimes need to be evacuated quickly. Floods and fires.”
“So open it.”
Langdon didn’t need any encouragement. With his academic life’s dream right in front of him
and the thinning air in the chamber, he was in no mood to dawdle. He unsnapped the latch and lifted
the lid. Inside, flat on the floor of the bin, lay a black, duck-cloth pouch. The cloth’s breathability
was critical to the preservation of its contents. Reaching in with both hands and keeping the pouch
horizontal, Langdon lifted it out of the bin.
“I expected a treasure chest,” Vittoria said. “Looks more like a pillowcase.”
“Follow me,” he said. Holding the bag before him like a sacred offering, Langdon walked to
the center of the vault where he found the customary glass-topped archival exam table. Although
the central location was intended to minimize in-vault travel of documents, researchers appreciated
the privacy the surrounding stacks afforded. Career-making discoveries were uncovered in the top
vaults of the world, and most academics did not like rivals peering through the glass as they
worked.
Langdon lay the pouch on the table and unbuttoned the opening. Vittoria stood by.
Rummaging through a tray of archivist tools, Langdon found the felt-pad pincers archivists called
finger cymbals –oversized tweezers with flattened disks on each arm. As his excitement mounted,
Langdon feared at any moment he might awake back in Cambridge with a pile of test papers to
grade. Inhaling deeply, he opened the bag. Fingers trembling in their cotton gloves, he reached in
with his tongs.
“Relax,” Vittoria said. “It’s paper, not plutonium.”
Langdon slid the tongs around the stack of documents inside and was careful to apply even
pressure. Then, rather than pulling out the documents, he held them in place while he slid off the
bag–an archivist’s procedure for minimizing torque on the artifact. Not until the bag was removed
and Langdon had turned on the exam darklight beneath the table did he begin breathing again.
Vittoria looked like a specter now, lit from below by the lamp beneath the glass. “Small
sheets,” she said, her voice reverent.
Langdon nodded. The stack of folios before them looked like loose pages from a small
paperback novel. Langdon could see that the top sheet was an ornate pen and ink cover sheet with
the title, the date, and Galileo’s name in his own hand.
In that instant, Langdon forgot the cramped quarters, forgot his exhaustion, forgot the
horrifying situation that had brought him here. He simply stared in wonder. Close encounters with
history always left Langdon numbed with reverence… like seeing the brushstrokes on the Mona
Lisa.
The muted, yellow papyrus left no doubt in Langdon’s mind as to its age and authenticity, but
excluding the inevitable fading, the document was in superb condition. Slight bleaching of the
pigment . Minor sundering and cohesion of the papyrus . But all in all … in damn fine condition .
He studied the ornate hand etching of the cover, his vision blurring in the lack of humidity. Vittoria
was silent.
“Hand me a spatula, please.” Langdon motioned beside Vittoria to a tray filled with
stainless-steel archival tools. She handed it to him. Langdon took the tool in his hand. It was a good
one. He ran his fingers across the face to remove any static charge and then, ever so carefully, slid
the blade beneath the cover. Then, lifting the spatula, he turned over the cover sheet.
The first page was written in longhand, the tiny, stylized calligraphy almost impossible to
read. Langdon immediately noticed that there were no diagrams or numbers on the page. It was an
essay.
“Heliocentricity,” Vittoria said, translating the heading on folio one. She scanned the text.
“Looks like Galileo renouncing the geocentric model once and for all. Ancient Italian, though, so no
promises on the translation.”
“Forget it,” Langdon said. “We’re looking for math. The pure language.” He used the spatula
tool to flip the next page. Another essay. No math or diagrams. Langdon’s hands began to sweat
inside his gloves.
“Movement of the Planets,” Vittoria said, translating the title.
Langdon frowned. On any other day, he would have been fascinated to read it; incredibly
NASA’s current model of planetary orbits, observed through high-powered telescopes, was
supposedly almost identical to Galileo’s original predictions.
“No math,” Vittoria said. “He’s talking about retrograde motions and elliptical orbits or
something.”
Elliptical orbits . Langdon recalled that much of Galileo’s legal trouble had begun when he
described planetary motion as elliptical . The Vatican exalted the perfection of the circle and
insisted heavenly motion must be only circular. Galileo’s Illuminati, however, saw perfection in the
ellipse as well, revering the mathematical duality of its twin foci. The Illuminati’s ellipse was
prominent even today in modern Masonic tracing boards and footing inlays.
“Next,” Vittoria said.
Langdon flipped.
“Lunar phases and tidal motion,” she said. “No numbers. No diagrams.”
Langdon flipped again. Nothing. He kept flipping through a dozen or so pages. Nothing.
Nothing. Nothing.
“I thought this guy was a mathematician,” Vittoria said. “This is all text.”
Langdon felt the air in his lungs beginning to thin. His hopes were thinning too. The pile was
waning.
“Nothing here,” Vittoria said. “No math. A few dates, a few standard figures, but nothing that
looks like it could be a clue.”
Langdon flipped over the last folio and sighed. It, too, was an essay.
“Short book,” Vittoria said, frowning.
Langdon nodded.
“Merda , as we say in Rome.”
Shit is right , Langdon thought. His reflection in the glass seemed mocking, like the image
staring back at him this morning from his bay window. An aging ghost . “There’s got to be
something,” he said, the hoarse desperation in his voice surprising him. “The segno is here
somewhere. I know it!”
“Maybe you were wrong about DIII?”
Langdon turned and stared at her.
“Okay,” she agreed, “DIII makes perfect sense. But maybe the clue isn’t mathematical?”
“Lingua pura . What else would it be?”
“Art?”
“Except there are no diagrams or pictures in the book.”
“All I know is that lingua pura refers to something other than Italian. Math just seems
logical.”
“I agree.”
Langdon refused to accept defeat so quickly. “The numbers must be written longhand. The
math must be in words rather than equations.”
“It’ll take some time to read all the pages.”
“Time’s something we don’t have. We’ll have to split the work.” Langdon flipped the stack
back over to the beginning. “I know enough Italian to spot numbers.” Using his spatula, he cut the
stack like a deck of cards and lay the first half-dozen pages in front of Vittoria. “It’s in here
somewhere. I’m sure.”
Vittoria reached down and flipped her first page by hand.
“Spatula!” Langdon said, grabbing her an extra tool from the tray. “Use the spatula.”
“I’m wearing gloves,” she grumbled. “How much damage could I cause?”
“Just use it.”
Vittoria picked up the spatula. “You feeling what I’m feeling?”
“Tense?”
“No. Short of breath.”
Langdon was definitely starting to feel it too. The air was thinning faster than he had
imagined. He knew they had to hurry. Archival conundrums were nothing new for him, but usually
he had more than a few minutes to work them out. Without another word, Langdon bowed his head
and began translating the first page in his stack.
Show yourself, damn it! Show yourself!
53
Somewhere beneath Rome the dark figure prowled down a stone ramp into the underground
tunnel. The ancient passageway was lit only by torches, making the air hot and thick. Up ahead the
frightened voices of grown men called out in vain, echoing in the cramped spaces.
As he rounded the corner he saw them, exactly as he had left them–four old men, terrified,
sealed behind rusted iron bars in a stone cubicle.
“Qui êtes-vous?” one of the men demanded in French. “What do you want with us?”
“Hilfe!” another said in German. “Let us go!”
“Are you aware who we are?” one asked in English, his accent Spanish.
“Silence,” the raspy voice commanded. There was a finality about the word.
The fourth prisoner, an Italian, quiet and thoughtful, looked into the inky void of his captor’s
eyes and swore he saw hell itself. God help us , he thought.
The killer checked his watch and then returned his gaze to the prisoners. “Now then,” he said.
“Who will be first?”
54
Inside Archive Vault 10 Robert Langdon recited Italian numbers as he scanned the
calligraphy before him. Mille … centi … uno, duo, tre … cincuanta . I need a numerical reference!
Anything, damnit!
When he reached the end of his current folio, he lifted the spatula to flip the page. As he
aligned the blade with the next page, he fumbled, having difficulty holding the tool steady. Minutes
later, he looked down and realized he had abandoned his spatula and was turning pages by hand.
Oops , he thought, feeling vaguely criminal. The lack of oxygen was affecting his inhibitions. Looks
like I’ll burn in archivist’s hell .
“About damn time,” Vittoria choked when she saw Langdon turning pages by hand. She
dropped her spatula and followed suit.
“Any luck?”
Vittoria shook her head. “Nothing that looks purely mathematical. I’m skimming… but none
of this reads like a clue.”
Langdon continued translating his folios with increasing difficulty. His Italian skills were
rocky at best, and the tiny penmanship and archaic language was making it slow going. Vittoria
reached the end of her stack before Langdon and looked disheartened as she flipped the pages back
over. She hunkered down for another more intense inspection.
When Langdon finished his final page, he cursed under his breath and looked over at Vittoria.
She was scowling, squinting at something on one of her folios. “What is it?” he asked.
Vittoria did not look up. “Did you have any footnotes on your pages?”
“Not that I noticed. Why?”
“This page has a footnote. It’s obscured in a crease.”
Langdon tried to see what she was looking at, but all he could make out was the page number
in the upper right-hand corner of the sheet. Folio 5. It took a moment for the coincidence to register,
and even when it did the connection seemed vague. Folio Five . Five, Pythagoras, pentagrams,
Illuminati . Langdon wondered if the Illuminati would have chosen page five on which to hide their
clue. Through the reddish fog surrounding them, Langdon sensed a tiny ray of hope. “Is the
footnote mathematical?”
Vittoria shook her head. “Text. One line. Very small printing. Almost illegible.”
His hopes faded. “It’s supposed to be math. Lingua pura .”
“Yeah, I know.” She hesitated. “I think you’ll want to hear this, though.” Langdon sensed
excitement in her voice.
“Go ahead.”
Squinting at the folio, Vittoria read the line. “The path of light is laid, the sacred test.”
The words were nothing like what Langdon had imagined. “I’m sorry?”
Vittoria repeated the line. “The path of light is laid, the sacred test.”
“Path of light?” Langdon felt his posture straightening.
“That’s what it says. Path of light.”
As the words sank in, Langdon felt his delirium pierced by an instant of clarity. The path of
light is laid, the sacred test . He had no idea how it helped them, but the line was as direct a
reference to the Path of Illumination as he could imagine. Path of light . Sacred test . His head felt
like an engine revving on bad fuel. “Are you sure of the translation?”
Vittoria hesitated. “Actually…” She glanced over at him with a strange look. “It’s not
technically a translation. The line is written in English .”
For an instant, Langdon thought the acoustics in the chamber had affected his hearing.
“English? ”
Vittoria pushed the document over to him, and Langdon read the minuscule printing at the
bottom of the page. “The path of light is laid, the sacred test . English? What is English doing in
an Italian book?”
Vittoria shrugged. She too was looking tipsy. “Maybe English is what they meant by the
lingua pura ? It’s considered the international language of science. It’s all we speak at CERN.”
“But this was in the 1600s,” Langdon argued. “Nobody spoke English in Italy, not even–” He
stopped short, realizing what he was about to say. “Not even… the clergy .” Langdon’s academic
mind hummed in high gear. “In the 1600s,” he said, talking faster now, “English was one language
the Vatican had not yet embraced. They dealt in Italian, Latin, German, even Spanish and French,
but English was totally foreign inside the Vatican. They considered English a polluted, free-thinkers
language for profane men like Chaucer and Shakespeare.” Langdon flashed suddenly on the
Illuminati brands of Earth, Air, Fire, Water. The legend that the brands were in English now made
a bizarre kind of sense.
“So you’re saying maybe Galileo considered English la lingua pura because it was the one
language the Vatican did not control?”
“Yes. Or maybe by putting the clue in English, Galileo was subtly restricting the readership
away from the Vatican.”
“But it’s not even a clue,” Vittoria argued. “The path of light is laid, the sacred test? What
the hell does that mean?”
She’s right , Langdon thought. The line didn’t help in any way. But as he spoke the phrase
again in his mind, a strange fact hit him. Now that’s odd , he thought. What are the chances of that?
“We need to get out of here,” Vittoria said, sounding hoarse.
Langdon wasn’t listening. The path of light is laid, the sacred test . “It’s a damn line of iambic
pentameter,” he said suddenly, counting the syllables again. “Five couplets of alternating stressed
and unstressed syllables.”
Vittoria looked lost. “Iambic who?”
For an instant Langdon was back at Phillips Exeter Academy sitting in a Saturday morning
English class. Hell on earth . The school baseball star, Peter Greer, was having trouble
remembering the number of couplets necessary for a line of Shakespearean iambic pentameter.
Their professor, an animated schoolmaster named Bissell, leapt onto the table and bellowed,
“Penta-meter, Greer! Think of home plate! A penta-gon! Five sides! Penta! Penta! Penta! Jeeeesh!”
Five couplets , Langdon thought. Each couplet, by definition, having two syllables. He could
not believe in his entire career he had never made the connection. Iambic pentameter was a
symmetrical meter based on the sacred Illuminati numbers of 5 and 2!
You’re reaching! Langdon told himself, trying to push it from his mind. A meaningless
coincidence! But the thought stuck. Five … for Pythagoras and the pentagram . Two … for the
duality of all things .
A moment later, another realization sent a numbing sensation down his legs. Iambic
pentameter, on account of its simplicity, was often called “pure verse” or “pure meter.” La lingua
pura? Could this have been the pure language the Illuminati had been referring to? The path of
light is laid, the sacred test …
“Uh oh,” Vittoria said.
Langdon wheeled to see her rotating the folio upside down. He felt a knot in his gut. Not
again . “There’s no way that line is an ambigram!”
“No, it’s not an ambigram… but it’s…” She kept turning the document, 90 degrees at every
turn.
“It’s what?”
Vittoria looked up. “It’s not the only line.”
“There’s another?”
“There’s a different line on every margin. Top, bottom, left, and right. I think it’s a poem.”
“Four lines?” Langdon bristled with excitement. Galileo was a poet? “Let me see!”
Vittoria did not relinquish the page. She kept turning the page in quarter turns. “I didn’t see
the lines before because they’re on the edges.” She cocked her head over the last line. “Huh. You
know what? Galileo didn’t even write this.”
“What!”
“The poem is signed John Milton.”
“John Milton ?” The influential English poet who wrote Paradise Lost was a contemporary
of Galileo’s and a savant who conspiracy buffs put at the top of their list of Illuminati suspects.
Milton’s alleged affiliation with Galileo’s Illuminati was one legend Langdon suspected was true.
Not only had Milton made a well-documented 1638 pilgrimage to Rome to “commune with
enlightened men,” but he had held meetings with Galileo during the scientist’s house arrest,
meetings portrayed in many Renaissance paintings, including Annibale Gatti’s famous Galileo and
Milton , which hung even now in the IMSS Museum in Florence.
“Milton knew Galileo, didn’t he?” Vittoria said, finally pushing the folio over to Langdon.
“Maybe he wrote the poem as a favor?”
Langdon clenched his teeth as he took the sheathed document. Leaving it flat on the table, he
read the line at the top. Then he rotated the page 90 degrees, reading the line in the right margin.
Another twist, and he read the bottom. Another twist, the left. A final twist completed the circle.
There were four lines in all. The first line Vittoria had found was actually the third line of the poem.
Utterly agape, he read the four lines again, clockwise in sequence: top, right, bottom, left. When he
was done, he exhaled. There was no doubt in his mind. “You found it, Ms. Vetra.”
She smiled tightly. “Good, now can we get the hell out of here?”
“I have to copy these lines down. I need to find a pencil and paper.”
Vittoria shook her head. “Forget it, professor. No time to play scribe. Mickey’s ticking.” She
took the page from him and headed for the door.
Langdon stood up. “You can’t take that outside! It’s a–”
But Vittoria was already gone.
55
Langdon and Vittoria exploded onto the courtyard outside the Secret Archives. The fresh air
felt like a drug as it flowed into Langdon’s lungs. The purple spots in his vision quickly faded. The
guilt, however, did not. He had just been accomplice to stealing a priceless relic from the world’s
most private vault. The camerlegno had said, I am giving you my trust .
“Hurry,” Vittoria said, still holding the folio in her hand and striding at a half-jog across Via
Borgia in the direction of Olivetti’s office.
“If any water gets on that papyrus–”
“Calm down. When we decipher this thing, we can return their sacred Folio 5.”
Langdon accelerated to keep up. Beyond feeling like a criminal, he was still dazed over the
document’s spellbinding implications. John Milton was an Illuminatus . He composed the poem for
Galileo to publish in Folio 5 … far from the eyes of the Vatican .
As they left the courtyard, Vittoria held out the folio for Langdon. “You think you can
decipher this thing? Or did we just kill all those brain cells for kicks?”
Langdon took the document carefully in his hands. Without hesitation he slipped it into one of
the breast pockets of his tweed jacket, out of the sunlight and dangers of moisture. “I deciphered it
already.”
Vittoria stopped short. “You what ?”
Langdon kept moving.
Vittoria hustled to catch up. “You read it once! I thought it was supposed to be hard!”
Langdon knew she was right, and yet he had deciphered the segno in a single reading. A
perfect stanza of iambic pentameter, and the first altar of science had revealed itself in pristine
clarity. Admittedly, the ease with which he had accomplished the task left him with a nagging
disquietude. He was a child of the Puritan work ethic. He could still hear his father speaking the old
New England aphorism: If it wasn’t painfully difficult, you did it wrong . Langdon hoped the saying
was false. “I deciphered it,” he said, moving faster now. “I know where the first killing is going to
happen. We need to warn Olivetti.”
Vittoria closed in on him. “How could you already know? Let me see that thing again.” With
the sleight of a boxer, she slipped a lissome hand into his pocket and pulled out the folio again.
“Careful!” Langdon said. “You can’t–”
Vittoria ignored him. Folio in hand, she floated beside him, holding the document up to the
evening light, examining the margins. As she began reading aloud, Langdon moved to retrieve the
folio but instead found himself bewitched by Vittoria’s accented alto speaking the syllables in
perfect rhythm with her gait.
For a moment, hearing the verse aloud, Langdon felt transported in time… as though he were
one of Galileo’s contemporaries, listening to the poem for the first time… knowing it was a test, a
map, a clue unveiling the four altars of science… the four markers that blazed a secret path across
Rome. The verse flowed from Vittoria’s lips like a song.
From Santi’s earthly tomb with demon’s hole,
‘Cross Rome the mystic elements unfold.
The path of light is laid, the sacred test,
Let angels guide you on your lofty quest.
Vittoria read it twice and then fell silent, as if letting the ancient words resonate on their own.
From Santi’s earthly tomb , Langdon repeated in his mind. The poem was crystal clear about
that. The Path of Illumination began at Santi’s tomb. From there, across Rome, the markers blazed
the trail.
From Santi’s earthly tomb with demon’s hole,
‘Cross Rome the mystic elements unfold.
Mystic elements . Also clear. Earth, Air, Fire, Water . Elements of science, the four Illuminati
markers disguised as religious sculpture.
“The first marker,” Vittoria said, “sounds like it’s at Santi’s tomb.”
Langdon smiled. “I told you it wasn’t that tough.”
“So who is Santi?” she asked, sounding suddenly excited. “And where’s his tomb?”
Langdon chuckled to himself. He was amazed how few people knew Santi , the last name of
one of the most famous Renaissance artists ever to live. His first name was world renowned… the
child prodigy who at the age of twenty-five was already doing commissions for Pope Julius II, and
when he died at only thirty-eight, left behind the greatest collection of frescoes the world had ever
seen. Santi was a behemoth in the art world, and being known solely by one’s first name was a level
of fame achieved only by an elite few… people like Napoleon, Galileo, and Jesus… and, of course,
the demigods Langdon now heard blaring from Harvard dormitories–Sting, Madonna, Jewel, and
the artist formerly known as Prince, who had changed his name to the symbol
causing Langdon to dub him “The Tau Cross With Intersecting Hermaphroditic Ankh.”
“Santi,” Langdon said, “is the last name of the great Renaissance master, Raphael.”
Vittoria looked surprised. “Raphael? As in the Raphael?”
“The one and only.” Langdon pushed on toward the Office of the Swiss Guard.
“So the path starts at Raphael’s tomb?”
“It actually makes perfect sense,” Langdon said as they rushed on. “The Illuminati often
considered great artists and sculptors honorary brothers in enlightenment. The Illuminati could have
chosen Raphael’s tomb as a kind of tribute.” Langdon also knew that Raphael, like many other
religious artists, was a suspected closet atheist.
Vittoria slipped the folio carefully back in Langdon’s pocket. “So where is he buried?”
Langdon took a deep breath. “Believe it or not, Raphael’s buried in the Pantheon.”
Vittoria looked skeptical. “The Pantheon?”
“The Raphael at the Pantheon.” Langdon had to admit, the Pantheon was not what he had
expected for the placement of the first marker. He would have guessed the first altar of science to be
at some quiet, out of the way church, something subtle. Even in the 1600s, the Pantheon, with its
tremendous, holed dome, was one of the best known sites in Rome.
“Is the Pantheon even a church ?” Vittoria asked.
“Oldest Catholic church in Rome.”
Vittoria shook her head. “But do you really think the first cardinal could be killed at the
Pantheon? That’s got to be one of the busiest tourist spots in Rome.”
Langdon shrugged. “The Illuminati said they wanted the whole world watching. Killing a
cardinal at the Pantheon would certainly open some eyes.”
“But how does this guy expect to kill someone at the Pantheon and get away unnoticed? It
would be impossible.”
“As impossible as kidnapping four cardinals from Vatican City? The poem is precise.”
“And you’re certain Raphael is buried inside the Pantheon?”
“I’ve seen his tomb many times.”
Vittoria nodded, still looking troubled. “What time is it?”
Langdon checked. “Seven-thirty.”
“Is the Pantheon far?”
“A mile maybe. We’ve got time.”
“The poem said Santi’s earthly tomb. Does that mean anything to you?”
Langdon hastened diagonally across the Courtyard of the Sentinel. “Earthly? Actually, there’s
probably no more earthly place in Rome than the Pantheon. It got its name from the original
religion practiced there–Pantheism–the worship of all gods, specifically the pagan gods of Mother
Earth.”
As a student of architecture, Langdon had been amazed to learn that the dimensions of the
Pantheon’s main chamber were a tribute to Gaea–the goddess of the Earth. The proportions were so
exact that a giant spherical globe could fit perfectly inside the building with less than a millimeter to
spare.
“Okay,” Vittoria said, sounding more convinced. “And demon’s hole? From Santi’s earthly
tomb with demon’s hole? ”
Langdon was not quite as sure about this. “Demon’s hole must mean the oculus ,” he said,
making a logical guess. “The famous circular opening in the Pantheon’s roof.”
“But it’s a church ,” Vittoria said, moving effortlessly beside him. “Why would they call the
opening a demon’s hole?”
Langdon had actually been wondering that himself. He had never heard the term “demon’s
hole,” but he did recall a famous sixth-century critique of the Pantheon whose words seemed oddly
appropriate now. The Venerable Bede had once written that the hole in the Pantheon’s roof had
been bored by demons trying to escape the building when it was consecrated by Boniface IV.
“And why,” Vittoria added as they entered a smaller courtyard, “why would the Illuminati use
the name Santi if he was really known as Raphael ?”
“You ask a lot of questions.”
“My dad used to say that.”
“Two possible reasons. One, the word Raphael has too many syllables. It would have
destroyed the poem’s iambic pentameter.”
“Sounds like a stretch.”
Langdon agreed. “Okay, then maybe using ‘Santi’ was to make the clue more obscure, so
only very enlightened men would recognize the reference to Raphael.”
Vittoria didn’t appear to buy this either. “I’m sure Raphael’s last name was very well known
when he was alive.”
“Surprisingly not. Single name recognition was a status symbol. Raphael shunned his last
name much like pop stars do today. Take Madonna, for example. She never uses her surname,
Ciccone.”
Vittoria looked amused. “You know Madonna’s last name?”
Langdon regretted the example. It was amazing the kind of garbage a mind picked up living
with 10,000 adolescents.
As he and Vittoria passed the final gate toward the Office of the Swiss Guard, their progress
was halted without warning.
“Para!” a voice bellowed behind them.
Langdon and Vittoria wheeled to find themselves looking into the barrel of a rifle.
“Attento!” Vittoria exclaimed, jumping back. “Watch it with–”
“Non sportarti!” the guard snapped, cocking the weapon.
“Soldato!” a voice commanded from across the courtyard. Olivetti was emerging from the
security center. “Let them go!”
The guard looked bewildered. “Ma, signore, è una donna –”
“Inside!” he yelled at the guard.
“Signore, non posso –”
“Now! You have new orders. Captain Rocher will be briefing the corps in two minutes. We
will be organizing a search.”
Looking bewildered, the guard hurried into the security center. Olivetti marched toward
Langdon, rigid and steaming. “Our most secret archives? I’ll want an explanation.”
“We have good news,” Langdon said.
Olivetti’s eyes narrowed. “It better be damn good.”
56
The four unmarked Alpha Romeo 155 T-Sparks roared down Via dei Coronari like fighter jets
off a runway. The vehicles carried twelve plainclothed Swiss Guards armed with Cherchi-Pardini
semiautomatics, local-radius nerve gas canisters, and long-range stun guns. The three sharpshooters
carried laser-sighted rifles.
Sitting in the passenger seat of the lead car, Olivetti turned backward toward Langdon and
Vittoria. His eyes were filled with rage. “You assured me a sound explanation, and this is what I
get?”
Langdon felt cramped in the small car. “I understand your–”
“No, you don’t understand!” Olivetti never raised his voice, but his intensity tripled. “I have
just removed a dozen of my best men from Vatican City on the eve of conclave. And I have done
this to stake out the Pantheon based on the testimony of some American I have never met who has
just interpreted a four-hundred-year-old poem. I have also just left the search for this antimatter
weapon in the hands of secondary officers.”
Langdon resisted the urge to pull Folio 5 from his pocket and wave it in Olivetti’s face. “All I
know is that the information we found refers to Raphael’s tomb, and Raphael’s tomb is inside the
Pantheon.”
The officer behind the wheel nodded. “He’s right, commander. My wife and I–”
“Drive,” Olivetti snapped. He turned back to Langdon. “How could a killer accomplish an
assassination in such a crowded place and escape unseen?”
“I don’t know,” Langdon said. “But the Illuminati are obviously highly resourceful. They’ve
broken into both CERN and Vatican City. It’s only by luck that we know where the first kill zone
is. The Pantheon is your one chance to catch this guy.”
“More contradictions,” Olivetti said. “One chance? I thought you said there was some sort of
pathway. A series of markers. If the Pantheon is the right spot, we can follow the pathway to the
other markers. We will have four chances to catch this guy.”
“I had hoped so,” Langdon said. “And we would have… a century ago.”
Langdon’s realization that the Pantheon was the first altar of science had been a bittersweet
moment. History had a way of playing cruel tricks on those who chased it. It was a long shot that
the Path of Illumination would be intact after all of these years, with all of its statues in place, but
part of Langdon had fantasized about following the path all the way to the end and coming face to
face with the sacred Illuminati lair. Alas, he realized, it was not to be. “The Vatican had all the
statues in the Pantheon removed and destroyed in the late 1800s.”
Vittoria looked shocked. “Why?”
“The statues were pagan Olympian Gods. Unfortunately, that means the first marker is
gone… and with it–”
“Any hope,” Vittoria said, “of finding the Path of Illumination and additional markers?”
Langdon shook his head. “We have one shot. The Pantheon. After that, the path disappears.”
Olivetti stared at them both a long moment and then turned and faced front. “Pull over,” he
barked to the driver.
The driver swerved the car toward the curb and put on the brakes. Three other Alpha Romeos
skidded in behind them. The Swiss Guard convoy screeched to a halt.
“What are you doing!” Vittoria demanded.
“My job,” Olivetti said, turning in his seat, his voice like stone. “Mr. Langdon, when you told
me you would explain the situation en route, I assumed I would be approaching the Pantheon with a
clear idea of why my men are here. That is not the case. Because I am abandoning critical duties by
being here, and because I have found very little that makes sense in this theory of yours about virgin
sacrifices and ancient poetry, I cannot in good conscience continue. I am recalling this mission
immediately.” He pulled out his walkie-talkie and clicked it on.
Vittoria reached across the seat and grabbed his arm. “You can’t!”
Olivetti slammed down the walkie-talkie and fixed her with a red-hot stare. “Have you been
to the Pantheon, Ms. Vetra?”
“No, but I–”
“Let me tell you something about it. The Pantheon is a single room. A circular cell made of
stone and cement. It has one entrance. No windows. One narrow entrance. That entrance is
flanked at all times by no less than four armed Roman policemen who protect this shrine from art
defacers, anti-Christian terrorists, and gypsy tourist scams.”
“Your point?” she said coolly.
“My point?” Olivetti’s knuckles gripped the seat. “My point is that what you have just told me
is going to happen is utterly impossible! Can you give me one plausible scenario of how someone
could kill a cardinal inside the Pantheon? How does one even get a hostage past the guards into
the Pantheon in the first place? Much less actually kill him and get away?” Olivetti leaned over the
seat, his coffee breath now in Langdon’s face. “How, Mr. Langdon? One plausible scenario.”
Langdon felt the tiny car shrink around him. I have no idea! I’m not an assassin! I don’t know
how he will do it! I only know –
“One scenario?” Vittoria quipped, her voice unruffled. “How about this? The killer flies over
in a helicopter and drops a screaming, branded cardinal down through the hole in the roof. The
cardinal hits the marble floor and dies.”
Everyone in the car turned and stared at Vittoria. Langdon didn’t know what to think. You’ve
got one sick imagination, lady, but you are quick .
Olivetti frowned. “Possible, I admit… but hardly–”
“Or the killer drugs the cardinal,” Vittoria said, “brings him to the Pantheon in a wheelchair
like some old tourist. He wheels him inside, quietly slits his throat, and then walks out.”
This seemed to wake up Olivetti a bit.
Not bad! Langdon thought.
“Or,” she said, “the killer could–”
“I heard you,” Olivetti said. “Enough.” He took a deep breath and blew it out. Someone
rapped sharply on the window, and everyone jumped. It was a soldier from one of the other cars.
Olivetti rolled down the window.
“Everything all right, commander?” The soldier was dressed in street clothes. He pulled back
the sleeve of his denim shirt to reveal a black chronograph military watch. “Seven-forty,
commander. We’ll need time to get in position.”
Olivetti nodded vaguely but said nothing for many moments. He ran a finger back and forth
across the dash, making a line in the dust. He studied Langdon in the side-view mirror, and
Langdon felt himself being measured and weighed. Finally Olivetti turned back to the guard. There
was reluctance in his voice. “I’ll want separate approaches. Cars to Piazza della Rotunda, Via delgi
Orfani, Piazza Sant’Ignacio, and Sant’Eustachio. No closer than two blocks. Once you’re parked,
gear up and await my orders. Three minutes.”
“Very good, sir.” The soldier returned to his car.
Langdon gave Vittoria an impressed nod. She smiled back, and for an instant Langdon felt an
unexpected connection… a thread of magnetism between them.
The commander turned in his seat and locked eyes with Langdon. “Mr. Langdon, this had
better not blow up in our faces.”
Langdon smiled uneasily. How could it?
57
The director of CERN, Maximilian Kohler, opened his eyes to the cool rush of cromolyn and
leukotriene in his body, dilating his bronchial tubes and pulmonary capillaries. He was breathing
normally again. He found himself lying in a private room in the CERN infirmary, his wheelchair
beside the bed.
He took stock, examining the paper robe they had put him in. His clothing was folded on the
chair beside the bed. Outside he could hear a nurse making the rounds. He lay there a long minute
listening. Then, as quietly as possible, he pulled himself to the edge of the bed and retrieved his
clothing. Struggling with his dead legs, he dressed himself. Then he dragged his body onto his
wheelchair.
Muffling a cough, he wheeled himself to the door. He moved manually, careful not to engage
the motor. When he arrived at the door he peered out. The hall was empty.
Silently, Maximilian Kohler slipped out of the infirmary.
58
“Seven-forty-six and thirty… mark .” Even speaking into his walkie-talkie, Olivetti’s voice
never seemed to rise above a whisper.
Langdon felt himself sweating now in his Harris tweed in the backseat of the Alpha Romeo,
which was idling in Piazza de la Concorde, three blocks from the Pantheon. Vittoria sat beside him,
looking engrossed by Olivetti, who was transmitting his final orders.
“Deployment will be an eight-point hem,” the commander said. “Full perimeter with a bias on
the entry. Target may know you visually, so you will be pas-visible . Nonmortal force only. We’ll
need someone to spot the roof. Target is primary. Asset secondary.”
Jesus , Langdon thought, chilled by the efficiency with which Olivetti had just told his men
the cardinal was expendable. Asset secondary .
“I repeat. Nonmortal procurement. We need the target alive. Go.” Olivetti snapped off his
walkie-talkie.
Vittoria looked stunned, almost angry. “Commander, isn’t anyone going inside ?”
Olivetti turned. “Inside?”
“Inside the Pantheon! Where this is supposed to happen?”
“Attento ,” Olivetti said, his eyes fossilizing. “If my ranks have been infiltrated, my men may
be known by sight. Your colleague has just finished warning me that this will be our sole chance
to catch the target. I have no intention of scaring anyone off by marching my men inside.”
“But what if the killer is already inside?”
Olivetti checked his watch. “The target was specific. Eight o’clock. We have fifteen minutes.”
“He said he would kill the cardinal at eight o’clock. But he may already have gotten the
victim inside somehow. What if your men see the target come out but don’t know who he is?
Someone needs to make sure the inside is clean.”
“Too risky at this point.”
“Not if the person going in was unrecognizable.”
“Disguising operatives is time consuming and–”
“I meant me ,” Vittoria said.
Langdon turned and stared at her.
Olivetti shook his head. “Absolutely not.”
“He killed my father.”
“Exactly, so he may know who you are.”
“You heard him on the phone. He had no idea Leonardo Vetra even had a daughter. He sure
as hell doesn’t know what I look like. I could walk in like a tourist. If I see anything suspicious, I
could walk into the square and signal your men to move in.”
“I’m sorry, I cannot allow that.”
“Comandante?” Olivetti’s receiver crackled. “We’ve got a situation from the north point. The
fountain is blocking our line of sight. We can’t see the entrance unless we move into plain view on
the piazza. What’s your call? Do you want us blind or vulnerable?”
Vittoria apparently had endured enough. “That’s it. I’m going.” She opened her door and got
out.
Olivetti dropped his walkie-talkie and jumped out of the car, circling in front of Vittoria.
Langdon got out too. What the hell is she doing!
Olivetti blocked Vittoria’s way. “Ms. Vetra, your instincts are good, but I cannot let a civilian
interfere.”
“Interfere? You’re flying blind. Let me help.”
“I would love to have a recon point inside, but…”
“But what?” Vittoria demanded. “But I’m a woman ?”
Olivetti said nothing.
“That had better not be what you were going to say, Commander, because you know damn
well this is a good idea, and if you let some archaic macho bullshit–”
“Let us do our job.”
“Let me help.”
“Too dangerous. We would have no lines of communication with you. I can’t let you carry a
walkie-talkie, it would give you away.”
Vittoria reached in her shirt pocket and produced her cell phone. “Plenty of tourists carry
phones.”
Olivetti frowned.
Vittoria unsnapped the phone and mimicked a call. “Hi, honey, I’m standing in the Pantheon.
You should see this place!” She snapped the phone shut and glared at Olivetti. “Who the hell is
going to know? It is a no-risk situation. Let me be your eyes!” She motioned to the cell phone on
Olivetti’s belt. “What’s your number?”
Olivetti did not reply.
The driver had been looking on and seemed to have some thoughts of his own. He got out of
the car and took the commander aside. They spoke in hushed tones for ten seconds. Finally Olivetti
nodded and returned. “Program this number.” He began dictating digits.
Vittoria programmed her phone.
“Now call the number.”
Vittoria pressed the auto dial. The phone on Olivetti’s belt began ringing. He picked it up and
spoke into the receiver. “Go into the building, Ms. Vetra, look around, exit the building, then call
and tell me what you see.”
Vittoria snapped the phone shut. “Thank you, sir.”
Langdon felt a sudden, unexpected surge of protective instinct. “Wait a minute,” he said to
Olivetti. “You’re sending her in there alone .”
Vittoria scowled at him. “Robert, I’ll be fine.”
The Swiss Guard driver was talking to Olivetti again.
“It’s dangerous,” Langdon said to Vittoria.
“He’s right,” Olivetti said. “Even my best men don’t work alone. My lieutenant has just
pointed out that the masquerade will be more convincing with both of you anyway.”
Both of us? Langdon hesitated. Actually, what I meant –
“Both of you entering together,” Olivetti said, “will look like a couple on holiday. You can
also back each other up. I’m more comfortable with that.”
Vittoria shrugged. “Fine, but we’ll need to go fast.”
Langdon groaned. Nice move, cowboy .
Olivetti pointed down the street. “First street you hit will be Via degli Orfani. Go left. It takes
you directly to the Pantheon. Two-minute walk, tops. I’ll be here, directing my men and waiting for
your call. I’d like you to have protection.” He pulled out his pistol. “Do either of you know how to
use a gun?”
Langdon’s heart skipped. We don’t need a gun!
Vittoria held her hand out. “I can tag a breaching porpoise from forty meters off the bow of a
rocking ship.”
“Good.” Olivetti handed the gun to her. “You’ll have to conceal it.”
Vittoria glanced down at her shorts. Then she looked at Langdon.
Oh no you don’t! Langdon thought, but Vittoria was too fast. She opened his jacket, and
inserted the weapon into one of his breast pockets. It felt like a rock dropping into his coat, his only
consolation being that Diagramma was in the other pocket.
“We look harmless,” Vittoria said. “We’re leaving.” She took Langdon’s arm and headed
down the street.
The driver called out, “Arm in arm is good. Remember, you’re tourists. Newlyweds even.
Perhaps if you held hands?”
As they turned the corner Langdon could have sworn he saw on Vittoria’s face the hint of a
smile.
59
The Swiss Guard “staging room” is located adjacent to the Corpo di Vigilanza barracks and is
used primarily for planning the security surrounding papal appearances and public Vatican events.
Today, however, it was being used for something else.
The man addressing the assembled task force was the second-in-command of the Swiss
Guard, Captain Elias Rocher. Rocher was a barrel-chested man with soft, puttylike features. He
wore the traditional blue captain’s uniform with his own personal flair–a red beret cocked sideways
on his head. His voice was surprisingly crystalline for such a large man, and when he spoke, his
tone had the clarity of a musical instrument. Despite the precision of his inflection, Rocher’s eyes
were cloudy like those of some nocturnal mammal. His men called him “orso”–grizzly bear. They
sometimes joked that Rocher was “the bear who walked in the viper’s shadow.” Commander
Olivetti was the viper. Rocher was just as deadly as the viper, but at least you could see him
coming.
Rocher’s men stood at sharp attention, nobody moving a muscle, although the information
they had just received had increased their aggregate blood pressure by a few thousand points.
Rookie Lieutenant Chartrand stood in the back of the room wishing he had been among the 99
percent of applicants who had not qualified to be here. At twenty years old, Chartrand was the
youngest guard on the force. He had been in Vatican City only three months. Like every man there,
Chartrand was Swiss Army trained and had endured two years of additional ausbilding in Bern
before qualifying for the grueling Vatican pròva held in a secret barracks outside of Rome.
Nothing in his training, however, had prepared him for a crisis like this.
At first Chartrand thought the briefing was some sort of bizarre training exercise. Futuristic
weapons? Ancient cults? Kidnapped cardinals? Then Rocher had shown them the live video feed
of the weapon in question. Apparently this was no exercise.
“We will be killing power in selected areas,” Rocher was saying, “to eradicate extraneous
magnetic interference. We will move in teams of four. We will wear infrared goggles for vision.
Reconnaissance will be done with traditional bug sweepers, recalibrated for sub-three-ohm flux
fields. Any questions?”
None.
Chartrand’s mind was on overload. “What if we don’t find it in time?” he asked, immediately
wishing he had not.
The grizzly bear gazed out at him from beneath his red beret. Then he dismissed the group
with a somber salute. “Godspeed, men.”
60
Two blocks from the Pantheon, Langdon and Vittoria approached on foot past a line of taxis,
their drivers sleeping in the front seats. Nap time was eternal in the Eternal City–the ubiquitous
public dozing a perfected extension of the afternoon siestas born of ancient Spain.
Langdon fought to focus his thoughts, but the situation was too bizarre to grasp rationally. Six
hours ago he had been sound asleep in Cambridge. Now he was in Europe, caught up in a surreal
battle of ancient titans, packing a semiautomatic in his Harris tweed, and holding hands with a
woman he had only just met.
He looked at Vittoria. She was focused straight ahead. There was a strength in her grasp–that
of an independent and determined woman. Her fingers wrapped around his with the comfort of
innate acceptance. No hesitation. Langdon felt a growing attraction. Get real , he told himself.
Vittoria seemed to sense his uneasiness. “Relax,” she said, without turning her head. “We’re
supposed to look like newlyweds.”
“I’m relaxed.”
“You’re crushing my hand.”
Langdon flushed and loosened up.
“Breathe through your eyes,” she said.
“I’m sorry?”
“It relaxes the muscles. It’s called pranayama .”
“Piranha?”
“Not the fish. Pranayama . Never mind.”
As they rounded the corner into Piazza della Rotunda, the Pantheon rose before them.
Langdon admired it, as always, with awe. The Pantheon . Temple to all gods . Pagan gods . Gods of
Nature and Earth . The structure seemed boxier from the outside than he remembered. The vertical
pillars and triangular pronaus all but obscured the circular dome behind it. Still, the bold and
immodest inscription over the entrance assured him they were in the right spot. M AGRIPPA L F
COS TERTIUM FECIT. Langdon translated it, as always, with amusement. Marcus Agrippa,
Consul for the third time, built this .
So much for humility , he thought, turning his eyes to the surrounding area. A scattering of
tourists with video cameras wandered the area. Others sat enjoying Rome’s best iced coffee at La
Tazza di Oro’s outdoor cafe. Outside the entrance to the Pantheon, four armed Roman policemen
stood at attention just as Olivetti had predicted.
“Looks pretty quiet,” Vittoria said.
Langdon nodded, but he felt troubled. Now that he was standing here in person, the whole
scenario seemed surreal. Despite Vittoria’s apparent faith that he was right, Langdon realized he
had put everyone on the line here. The Illuminati poem lingered. From Santi’s earthly tomb with
demon’s hole. YES , he told himself. This was the spot. Santi’s tomb. He had been here many times
beneath the Pantheon’s oculus and stood before the grave of the great Raphael.
“What time is it?” Vittoria asked.
Langdon checked his watch. “Seven-fifty. Ten minutes till show time.”
“Hope these guys are good,” Vittoria said, eyeing the scattered tourists entering the Pantheon.
“If anything happens inside that dome, we’ll all be in the crossfire.”
Langdon exhaled heavily as they moved toward the entrance. The gun felt heavy in his
pocket. He wondered what would happen if the policemen frisked him and found the weapon, but
the officers did not give them a second look. Apparently the disguise was convincing.
Langdon whispered to Vittoria. “Ever fire anything other than a tranquilizer gun?”
“Don’t you trust me?”
“Trust you? I barely know you.”
Vittoria frowned. “And here I thought we were newlyweds.”
61
The air inside the Pantheon was cool and damp, heavy with history. The sprawling ceiling
hovered overhead as though weightless–the 141-foot unsupported span larger even than the cupola
at St. Peter’s. As always, Langdon felt a chill as he entered the cavernous room. It was a remarkable
fusion of engineering and art. Above them the famous circular hole in the roof glowed with a
narrow shaft of evening sun. The oculus , Langdon thought. The demon’s hole .
They had arrived.
Langdon’s eyes traced the arch of the ceiling sloping outward to the columned walls and
finally down to the polished marble floor beneath their feet. The faint echo of footfalls and tourist
murmurs reverberated around the dome. Langdon scanned the dozen or so tourists wandering
aimlessly in the shadows. Are you here?
“Looks pretty quiet,” Vittoria said, still holding his hand.
Langdon nodded.
“Where’s Raphael’s tomb?”
Langdon thought for a moment, trying to get his bearings. He surveyed the circumference of
the room. Tombs. Altars. Pillars. Niches. He motioned to a particularly ornate funerary across the
dome and to the left. “I think that’s Raphael’s over there.”
Vittoria scanned the rest of the room. “I don’t see anyone who looks like an assassin about to
kill a cardinal. Shall we look around?”
Langdon nodded. “There’s only one spot in here where anyone could be hiding. We better
check the rientranze .”
“The recesses?”
“Yes.” Langdon pointed. “The recesses in the wall.”
Around the perimeter, interspersed with the tombs, a series of semicircular niches were hewn
in the wall. The niches, although not enormous, were big enough to hide someone in the shadows.
Sadly, Langdon knew they once contained statues of the Olympian gods, but the pagan sculptures
had been destroyed when the Vatican converted the Pantheon to a Christian church. He felt a pang
of frustration to know he was standing at the first altar of science, and the marker was gone. He
wondered which statue it had been, and where it had pointed. Langdon could imagine no greater
thrill than finding an Illuminati marker–a statue that surreptitiously pointed the way down the Path
of Illumination. Again he wondered who the anonymous Illuminati sculptor had been.
“I’ll take the left arc,” Vittoria said, indicating the left half of the circumference. “You go
right. See you in a hundred and eighty degrees.”
Langdon smiled grimly.
As Vittoria moved off, Langdon felt the eerie horror of the situation seeping back into his
mind. As he turned and made his way to the right, the killer’s voice seemed to whisper in the dead
space around him. Eight o’clock. Virgin sacrifices on the altars of science. A mathematical
progression of death. Eight, nine, ten, eleven… and at midnight . Langdon checked his watch: 7:52.
Eight minutes.
As Langdon moved toward the first recess, he passed the tomb of one of Italy’s Catholic
kings. The sarcophagus, like many in Rome, was askew with the wall, positioned awkwardly. A
group of visitors seemed confused by this. Langdon did not stop to explain. Formal Christian tombs
were often misaligned with the architecture so they could lie facing east . It was an ancient
superstition that Langdon’s Symbology 212 class had discussed just last month.
“That’s totally incongruous!” a female student in the front had blurted when Langdon
explained the reason for east-facing tombs. “Why would Christians want their tombs to face the
rising sun ? We’re talking about Christianity… not sun worship!”
Langdon smiled, pacing before the blackboard, chewing an apple. “Mr. Hitzrot!” he shouted.
A young man dozing in back sat up with a start. “What! Me?”
Langdon pointed to a Renaissance art poster on the wall. “Who is that man kneeling before
God?”
“Um… some saint?”
“Brilliant. And how do you know he’s a saint?”
“He’s got a halo?”
“Excellent, and does that golden halo remind you of anything?”
Hitzrot broke into a smile. “Yeah! Those Egyptian things we studied last term. Those… um…
sun disks !”
“Thank you, Hitzrot. Go back to sleep.” Langdon turned back to the class. “Halos, like much
of Christian symbology, were borrowed from the ancient Egyptian religion of sun worship.
Christianity is filled with examples of sun worship.”
“Excuse me?” the girl in front said. “I go to church all the time, and I don’t see much sun
worshiping going on!”
“Really? What do you celebrate on December twenty-fifth?”
“Christmas. The birth of Jesus Christ.”
“And yet according to the Bible, Christ was born in March, so what are we doing celebrating
in late December?”
Silence.
Langdon smiled. “December twenty-fifth, my friends, is the ancient pagan holiday of sol
invictus –Unconquered Sun–coinciding with the winter solstice. It’s that wonderful time of year
when the sun returns, and the days start getting longer.”
Langdon took another bite of apple.
“Conquering religions,” he continued, “often adopt existing holidays to make conversion less
shocking. It’s called transmutation . It helps people acclimatize to the new faith. Worshipers keep
the same holy dates, pray in the same sacred locations, use a similar symbology… and they simply
substitute a different god.”
Now the girl in front looked furious. “You’re implying Christianity is just some kind of…
repackaged sun worship !”
“Not at all. Christianity did not borrow only from sun worship. The ritual of Christian
canonization is taken from the ancient ‘god-making’ rite of Euhemerus. The practice of
‘god-eating’–that is, Holy Communion–was borrowed from the Aztecs. Even the concept of Christ
dying for our sins is arguably not exclusively Christian; the self-sacrifice of a young man to absolve
the sins of his people appears in the earliest tradition of the Quetzalcoatl.”
The girl glared. “So, is anything in Christianity original?”
“Very little in any organized faith is truly original. Religions are not born from scratch. They
grow from one another. Modern religion is a collage… an assimilated historical record of man’s
quest to understand the divine.”
“Um… hold on,” Hitzrot ventured, sounding awake now. “I know something Christian that’s
original. How about our image of God? Christian art never portrays God as the hawk sun god, or
as an Aztec, or as anything weird. It always shows God as an old man with a white beard. So our
image of God is original, right?”
Langdon smiled. “When the early Christian converts abandoned their former deities–pagan
gods, Roman gods, Greek, sun, Mithraic, whatever–they asked the church what their new Christian
God looked like. Wisely, the church chose the most feared, powerful… and familiar face in all of
recorded history.”
Hitzrot looked skeptical. “An old man with a white, flowing beard?”
Langdon pointed to a hierarchy of ancient gods on the wall. At the top sat an old man with a
white, flowing beard. “Does Zeus look familiar?”
The class ended right on cue.
“Good evening,” a man’s voice said.
Langdon jumped. He was back in the Pantheon. He turned to face an elderly man in a blue
cape with a red cross on the chest. The man gave him a gray-toothed smile.
“You’re English, right?” The man’s accent was thick Tuscan.
Langdon blinked, confused. “Actually, no. I’m American.”
The man looked embarrassed. “Oh heavens, forgive me. You were so nicely dressed, I just
figured… my apologies.”
“Can I help you?” Langdon asked, his heart beating wildly.
“Actually I thought perhaps I could help you . I am the cicerone here.” The man pointed
proudly to his city-issued badge. “It is my job to make your visit to Rome more interesting.”
More interesting? Langdon was certain this particular visit to Rome was plenty interesting.
“You look like a man of distinction,” the guide fawned, “no doubt more interested in culture
than most. Perhaps I can give you some history on this fascinating building.”
Langdon smiled politely. “Kind of you, but I’m actually an art historian myself, and–”
“Superb!” The man’s eyes lit up like he’d hit the jackpot. “Then you will no doubt find this
delightful!”
“I think I’d prefer to–”
“The Pantheon,” the man declared, launching into his memorized spiel, “was built by Marcus
Agrippa in 27 B.C.”
“Yes,” Langdon interjected, “and rebuilt by Hadrian in 119 A.D.”
“It was the world’s largest free-standing dome until 1960 when it was eclipsed by the
Superdome in New Orleans!”
Langdon groaned. The man was unstoppable.
“And a fifth-century theologian once called the Pantheon the House of the Devil , warning
that the hole in the roof was an entrance for demons!”
Langdon blocked him out. His eyes climbed skyward to the oculus, and the memory of
Vittoria’s suggested plot flashed a bone-numbing image in his mind… a branded cardinal falling
through the hole and hitting the marble floor. Now that would be a media event . Langdon found
himself scanning the Pantheon for reporters. None. He inhaled deeply. It was an absurd idea. The
logistics of pulling off a stunt like that would be ridiculous.
As Langdon moved off to continue his inspection, the babbling docent followed like a
love-starved puppy. Remind me , Langdon thought to himself, there’s nothing worse than a gung ho
art historian .
Across the room, Vittoria was immersed in her own search. Standing all alone for the first
time since she had heard the news of her father, she felt the stark reality of the last eight hours
closing in around her. Her father had been murdered–cruelly and abruptly. Almost equally painful
was that her father’s creation had been corrupted–now a tool of terrorists. Vittoria was plagued with
guilt to think that it was her invention that had enabled the antimatter to be transported… her
canister that was now counting down inside the Vatican. In an effort to serve her father’s quest for
the simplicity of truth… she had become a conspirator of chaos.
Oddly, the only thing that felt right in her life at the moment was the presence of a total
stranger. Robert Langdon. She found an inexplicable refuge in his eyes… like the harmony of the
oceans she had left behind early that morning. She was glad he was there. Not only had he been a
source of strength and hope for her, Langdon had used his quick mind to render this one chance to
catch her father’s killer.
Vittoria breathed deeply as she continued her search, moving around the perimeter. She was
overwhelmed by the unexpected images of personal revenge that had dominated her thoughts all
day. Even as a sworn lover of all life… she wanted this executioner dead . No amount of good
karma could make her turn the other cheek today. Alarmed and electrified, she sensed something
coursing through her Italian blood that she had never felt before… the whispers of Sicilian
ancestors defending family honor with brutal justice. Vendetta , Vittoria thought, and for the first
time in her life understood.
Visions of reprisal spurred her on. She approached the tomb of Raphael Santi. Even from a
distance she could tell this guy was special. His casket, unlike the others, was protected by a
Plexiglas shield and recessed into the wall. Through the barrier she could see the front of the
sarcophagus.
Raphael Santi
1483-1520
Vittoria studied the grave and then read the one-sentence descriptive plaque beside Raphael’s
tomb.
Then she read it again.
Then… she read it again.
A moment later, she was dashing in horror across the floor. “Robert! Robert! ”
62
Langdon’s progress around his side of the Pantheon was being hampered somewhat by the
guide on his heels, now continuing his tireless narration as Langdon prepared to check the final
alcove.
“You certainly seem to be enjoying those niches!” the docent said, looking delighted. “Were
you aware that the tapering thickness of the walls is the reason the dome appears weightless?”
Langdon nodded, not hearing a word as he prepared to examine another niche. Suddenly
someone grabbed him from behind. It was Vittoria. She was breathless and tugging at his arm.
From the look of terror on her face, Langdon could only imagine one thing. She found a body . He
felt an upswelling of dread.
“Ah, your wife!” the docent exclaimed, clearly thrilled to have another guest. He motioned to
her short pants and hiking boots. “Now you I can tell are American!”
Vittoria’s eyes narrowed. “I’m Italian.”
The guide’s smile dimmed. “Oh, dear.”
“Robert,” Vittoria whispered, trying to turn her back on the guide. “Galileo’s Diagramma . I
need to see it.”
“Diagramma?” the docent said, wheedling back in. “My! You two certainly know your
history! Unfortunately that document is not viewable. It is under secret preservation in the Vatican
Arc–”
“Could you excuse us?” Langdon said. He was confused by Vittoria’s panic. He took her
aside and reached in his pocket, carefully extracting the Diagramma folio. “What’s going on?”
“What’s the date on this thing?” Vittoria demanded, scanning the sheet.
The docent was on them again, staring at the folio, mouth agape. “That’s not… really…”
“Tourist reproduction,” Langdon quipped. “Thank you for your help. Please, my wife and I
would like a moment alone.”
The docent backed off, eyes never leaving the paper.
“Date,” Vittoria repeated to Langdon. “When did Galileo publish…”
Langdon pointed to the Roman numeral in the lower liner. “That’s the pub date. What’s going
on?”
Vittoria deciphered the number. “1639?”
“Yes. What’s wrong?”
Vittoria’s eyes filled with foreboding. “We’re in trouble, Robert. Big trouble. The dates don’t
match.”
“What dates don’t match?”
“Raphael’s tomb. He wasn’t buried here until 1759. A century after Diagramma was
published.”
Langdon stared at her, trying to make sense of the words. “No,” he replied. “Raphael died in
1520, long before Diagramma .”
“Yes, but he wasn’t buried here until much later.”
Langdon was lost. “What are you talking about?”
“I just read it. Raphael’s body was relocated to the Pantheon in 1758. It was part of some
historic tribute to eminent Italians.”
As the words settled in, Langdon felt like a rug had just been yanked out from under him.
“When that poem was written,” Vittoria declared, “Raphael’s tomb was somewhere else .
Back then, the Pantheon had nothing at all to do with Raphael!”
Langdon could not breathe. “But that… means…”
“Yes! It means we’re in the wrong place!”
Langdon felt himself sway. Impossible… I was certain…
Vittoria ran over and grabbed the docent, pulling him back. “Signore, excuse us. Where was
Raphael’s body in the 1600s?”
“Urb… Urbino,” he stammered, now looking bewildered. “His birthplace.”
“Impossible!” Langdon cursed to himself. “The Illuminati altars of science were here in
Rome. I’m certain of it!”
“Illuminati?” The docent gasped, looking again at the document in Langdon’s hand. “Who
are you people?”
Vittoria took charge. “We’re looking for something called Santi’s earthly tomb. In Rome. Can
you tell us what that might be?”
The docent looked unsettled. “This was Raphael’s only tomb in Rome.”
Langdon tried to think, but his mind refused to engage. If Raphael’s tomb wasn’t in Rome in
1655, then what was the poem referring to? Santi’s earthly tomb with demon’s hole? What the hell
is it? Think!
“Was there another artist called Santi?” Vittoria asked.
The docent shrugged. “Not that I know of.”
“How about anyone famous at all? Maybe a scientist or a poet or an astronomer named
Santi?”
The docent now looked like he wanted to leave. “No, ma’am. The only Santi I’ve ever heard
of is Raphael the architect.”
“Architect?” Vittoria said. “I thought he was a painter!”
“He was both, of course. They all were. Michelangelo, da Vinci, Raphael.”
Langdon didn’t know whether it was the docent’s words or the ornate tombs around them that
brought the revelation to mind, but it didn’t matter. The thought occurred. Santi was an architect .
From there the progression of thoughts fell like dominoes. Renaissance architects lived for only two
reasons–to glorify God with big churches, and to glorify dignitaries with lavish tombs. Santi’s tomb.
Could it be? The images came faster now…
da Vinci’s Mona Lisa .
Monet’s Water Lilies .
Michelangelo’s David .
Santi’s earthly tomb …
“Santi designed the tomb,” Langdon said.
Vittoria turned. “What?”
“It’s not a reference to where Raphael is buried, it’s referring to a tomb he designed .”
“What are you talking about?”
“I misunderstood the clue. It’s not Raphael’s burial site we’re looking for, it’s a tomb Raphael
designed for someone else . I can’t believe I missed it. Half of the sculpting done in Renaissance
and Baroque Rome was for the funeraries.” Langdon smiled with the revelation. “Raphael must
have designed hundreds of tombs!”
Vittoria did not look happy. “Hundreds?”
Langdon’s smile faded. “Oh.”
“Any of them earthly , professor?”
Langdon felt suddenly inadequate. He knew embarrassingly little about Raphael’s work.
Michelangelo he could have helped with, but Raphael’s work had never captivated him. Langdon
could only name a couple of Raphael’s more famous tombs, but he wasn’t sure what they looked
like.
Apparently sensing Langdon’s stymie, Vittoria turned to the docent, who was now inching
away. She grabbed his arm and reeled him in. “I need a tomb. Designed by Raphael. A tomb that
could be considered earthly .”
The docent now looked distressed. “A tomb of Raphael’s? I don’t know. He designed so
many. And you probably would mean a chapel by Raphael, not a tomb. Architects always
designed the chapels in conjunction with the tomb.”
Langdon realized the man was right.
“Are any of Raphael’s tombs or chapels considered earthly ?”
The man shrugged. “I’m sorry. I don’t know what you mean. Earthly really doesn’t describe
anything I know of. I should be going.”
Vittoria held his arm and read from the top line of the folio. “From Santi’s earthly tomb with
demon’s hole. Does that mean anything to you?”
“Not a thing.”
Langdon looked up suddenly. He had momentarily forgotten the second part of the line.
Demon’s hole? “Y es!” he said to the docent. “That’s it! Do any of Raphael’s chapels have an
oculus in them?”
The docent shook his head. “To my knowledge the Pantheon is unique.” He paused. “But…”
“But what!” Vittoria and Langdon said in unison.
Now the docent cocked his head, stepping toward them again. “A demon’s hole?” He
muttered to himself and picked at his teeth. “Demon’s hole… that is… buco di?volo ?”
Vittoria nodded. “Literally, yes.”
The docent smiled faintly. “Now there’s a term I have not heard in a while. If I’m not
mistaken, a buco di?volo refers to an undercroft.”
“An undercroft?” Langdon asked. “As in a crypt ?”
“Yes, but a specific kind of crypt. I believe a demon’s hole is an ancient term for a massive
burial cavity located in a chapel… underneath another tomb.”
“An ossuary annex?” Langdon demanded, immediately recognizing what the man was
describing.
The docent looked impressed. “Yes! That is the term I was looking for!”
Langdon considered it. Ossuary annexes were a cheap ecclesiastic fix to an awkward
dilemma. When churches honored their most distinguished members with ornate tombs inside the
sanctuary, surviving family members often demanded the family be buried together… thus ensuring
they too would have a coveted burial spot inside the church. However, if the church did not have
space or funds to create tombs for an entire family, they sometimes dug an ossuary annex–a hole in
the floor near the tomb where they buried the less worthy family members. The hole was then
covered with the Renaissance equivalent of a manhole cover. Although convenient, the ossuary
annex went out of style quickly because of the stench that often wafted up into the cathedral.
Demon’s hole , Langdon thought. He had never heard the term. It seemed eerily fitting.
Langdon’s heart was now pounding fiercely. From Santi’s earthly tomb with demon’s hole .
There seemed to be only one question left to ask. “Did Raphael design any tombs that had one of
these demon’s holes?”
The docent scratched his head. “Actually. I’m sorry… I can only think of one.”
Only one? Langdon could not have dreamed of a better response.
“Where!” Vittoria almost shouted.
The docent eyed them strangely. “It’s called the Chigi Chapel. Tomb of Agostino Chigi and
his brother, wealthy patrons of the arts and sciences.”
“Sciences?” Langdon said, exchanging looks with Vittoria.
“Where?” Vittoria asked again.
The docent ignored the question, seeming enthusiastic again to be of service. “As for whether
or not the tomb is earthly , I don’t know, but certainly it is… shall we say differénte .”
“Different?” Langdon said. “How?”
“Incoherent with the architecture. Raphael was only the architect. Some other sculptor did the
interior adornments. I can’t remember who.”
Langdon was now all ears. The anonymous Illuminati master, perhaps?
“Whoever did the interior monuments lacked taste,” the docent said. “Dio mio! Atrocit?s!
Who would want to be buried beneath pirámides ?”
Langdon could scarcely believe his ears. “Pyramids? The chapel contains pyramids?”
“I know,” the docent scoffed. “Terrible, isn’t it?”
Vittoria grabbed the docent’s arm. “Signore, where is this Chigi Chapel?”
“About a mile north. In the church of Santa Maria del Popolo.”
Vittoria exhaled. “Thank you. Let’s–”
“Hey,” the docent said, “I just thought of something. What a fool I am.”
Vittoria stopped short. “Please don’t tell me you made a mistake.”
He shook his head. “No, but it should have dawned on me earlier. The Chigi Chapel was not
always known as the Chigi. It used to be called Capella della Terra.”
“Chapel of the Land?” Langdon asked.
“No,” Vittoria said, heading for the door. “Chapel of the Earth .”
Vittoria Vetra whipped out her cell phone as she dashed into Piazza della Rotunda.
“Commander Olivetti,” she said. “This is the wrong place!”
Olivetti sounded bewildered. “Wrong? What do you mean?”
“The first altar of science is at the Chigi Chapel!”
“Where?” Now Olivetti sounded angry. “But Mr. Langdon said–”
“Santa Maria del Popolo! One mile north. Get your men over there now! We’ve got four
minutes!”
“But my men are in position here ! I can’t possibly–”
“Move!” Vittoria snapped the phone shut.
Behind her, Langdon emerged from the Pantheon, dazed.
She grabbed his hand and pulled him toward the queue of seemingly driverless taxis waiting
by the curb. She pounded on the hood of the first car in line. The sleeping driver bolted upright with
a startled yelp. Vittoria yanked open the rear door and pushed Langdon inside. Then she jumped in
behind him.
“Santa Maria del Popolo,” she ordered. “Presto! ”
Looking delirious and half terrified, the driver hit the accelerator, peeling out down the street.
63
Gunther Glick had assumed control of the computer from Chinita Macri, who now stood
hunched in the back of the cramped BBC van staring in confusion over Glick’s shoulder.
“I told you,” Glick said, typing some more keys. “The British Tattler isn’t the only paper
that runs stories on these guys.”
Macri peered closer. Glick was right. The BBC database showed their distinguished network
as having picked up and run six stories in the past ten years on the brotherhood called the Illuminati.
Well, paint me purple , she thought. “Who are the journalists who ran the stories,” Macri asked.
“Schlock jocks?”
“BBC doesn’t hire schlock jocks.”
“They hired you .”
Glick scowled. “I don’t know why you’re such a skeptic. The Illuminati are well documented
throughout history.”
“So are witches, UFOs, and the Loch Ness Monster.”
Glick read the list of stories. “You ever heard of a guy called Winston Churchill?”
“Rings a bell.”
“BBC did a historical a while back on Churchill’s life. Staunch Catholic by the way. Did you
know that in 1920 Churchill published a statement condemning the Illuminati and warning Brits of
a worldwide conspiracy against morality?”
Macri was dubious. “Where did it run? In the British Tattler ?”
Glick smiled. “London Herald . February 8, 1920.”
“No way.”
“Feast your eyes.”
Macri looked closer at the clip. London Herald. Feb. 8, 1920. I had no idea . “Well, Churchill
was a paranoid.”
“He wasn’t alone,” Glick said, reading further. “Looks like Woodrow Wilson gave three radio
broadcasts in 1921 warning of growing Illuminati control over the U.S. banking system. You want a
direct quote from the radio transcript?”
“Not really.”
Glick gave her one anyway. “He said, ‘There is a power so organized, so subtle, so complete,
so pervasive, that none had better speak above their breath when they speak in condemnation of it.’
”
“I’ve never heard anything about this.”
“Maybe because in 1921 you were just a kid.”
“Charming.” Macri took the jab in stride. She knew her years were showing. At forty-three,
her bushy black curls were streaked with gray. She was too proud for dye. Her mom, a Southern
Baptist, had taught Chinita contentedness and self-respect. When you’re a black woman , her
mother said, ain’t no hiding what you are. Day you try, is the day you die. Stand tall, smile bright,
and let ’em wonder what secret’s making you laugh .
“Ever heard of Cecil Rhodes?” Glick asked.
Macri looked up. “The British financier?”
“Yeah. Founded the Rhodes Scholarships.”
“Don’t tell me–”
“Illuminatus.”
“BS.”
“BBC, actually. November 16, 1984.”
“We wrote that Cecil Rhodes was Illuminati?”
“Sure did. And according to our network, the Rhodes Scholarships were funds set up
centuries ago to recruit the world’s brightest young minds into the Illuminati.”
“That’s ridiculous! My uncle was a Rhodes Scholar!”
Glick winked. “So was Bill Clinton.”
Macri was getting mad now. She had never had tolerance for shoddy, alarmist reporting. Still,
she knew enough about the BBC to know that every story they ran was carefully researched and
confirmed.
“Here’s one you’ll remember,” Glick said. “BBC, March 5, 1998. Parliament Committee
Chair, Chris Mullin, required all members of British Parliament who were Masons to declare their
affiliation.”
Macri remembered it. The decree had eventually extended to include policemen and judges as
well. “Why was it again?”
Glick read. “… concern that secret factions within the Masons exerted considerable control
over political and financial systems.”
“That’s right.”
“Caused quite a bustle. The Masons in parliament were furious. Had a right to be. The vast
majority turned out to be innocent men who joined the Masons for networking and charity work.
They had no clue about the brotherhood’s past affiliations.”
“Alleged affiliations.”
“Whatever.” Glick scanned the articles. “Look at this stuff. Accounts tracing the Illuminati
back to Galileo, the Guerenets of France, the Alumbrados of Spain. Even Karl Marx and the
Russian Revolution.”
“History has a way of rewriting itself.”
“Fine, you want something current? Have a look at this. Here’s an Illuminati reference from a
recent Wall Street Journal .”
This caught Macri’s ear. “The Journal ?”
“Guess what the most popular Internet computer game in America is right now?”
“Pin the tail on Pamela Anderson.”
“Close. It’s called, Illuminati: New World Order .”
Macri looked over his shoulder at the blurb. “Steve Jackson Games has a runaway hit… a
quasi-historical adventure in which an ancient satanic brotherhood from Bavaria sets out to take
over the world. You can find them on-line at …” Macri looked up, feeling ill. “What do these
Illuminati guys have against Christianity?”
“Not just Christianity,” Glick said. “Religion in general.” Glick cocked his head and grinned.
“Although from the phone call we just got, it appears they do have a special spot in their hearts for
the Vatican.”
“Oh, come on. You don’t really think that guy who called is who he claims to be, do you?”
“A messenger of the Illuminati? Preparing to kill four cardinals?” Glick smiled. “I sure hope
so.”
64
Langdon and Vittoria’s taxi completed the one-mile sprint up the wide Via della Scrofa in just
over a minute. They skidded to a stop on the south side of the Piazza del Popolo just before eight.
Not having any lire, Langdon overpaid the driver in U.S. dollars. He and Vittoria jumped out. The
piazza was quiet except for the laughter of a handful of locals seated outside the popular Rosati
Café–a hot spot of the Italian literati. The breeze smelled of espresso and pastry.
Langdon was still in shock over his mistake at the Pantheon. With a cursory glance at this
square, however, his sixth sense was already tingling. The piazza seemed subtly filled with
Illuminati significance. Not only was it laid out in a perfectly elliptical shape, but dead center
stood a towering Egyptian obelisk–a square pillar of stone with a distinctively pyramidal tip. Spoils
of Rome’s imperial plundering, obelisks were scattered across Rome and referred to by
symbologists as “Lofty Pyramids”–skyward extensions of the sacred pyramidal form.
As Langdon’s eyes moved up the monolith, though, his sight was suddenly drawn to
something else in the background. Something even more remarkable.
“We’re in the right place,” he said quietly, feeling a sudden exposed wariness. “Have a look at
that.” Langdon pointed to the imposing Porta del Popolo–the high stone archway at the far end of
the piazza. The vaulted structure had been overlooking the piazza for centuries. Dead center of the
archway’s highest point was a symbolic engraving. “Look familiar?”
Vittoria looked up at the huge carving. “A shining star over a triangular pile of stones?”
Langdon shook his head. “A source of Illumination over a pyramid.”
Vittoria turned, her eyes suddenly wide. “Like… the Great Seal of the United States?”
“Exactly. The Masonic symbol on the one-dollar bill.”
Vittoria took a deep breath and scanned the piazza. “So where’s this damn church?”
The Church of Santa Maria del Popolo stood out like a misplaced battleship, askew at the base
of a hill on the southeast corner of the piazza. The eleventh-century stone aerie was made even
more clumsy by the tower of scaffolding covering the façade.
Langdon’s thoughts were a blur as they raced toward the edifice. He stared up at the church in
wonder. Could a murder really be about to take place inside? He wished Olivetti would hurry. The
gun felt awkward in his pocket.
The church’s front stairs were ventaglio –a welcoming, curved fan–ironic in this case because
they were blocked with scaffolding, construction equipment, and a sign warning:
Construzzione.
Non Entrare
Langdon realized that a church closed for renovation meant total privacy for a killer. Not like
the Pantheon. No fancy tricks needed here. Only to find a way in.
Vittoria slipped without hesitation between the sawhorses and headed up the staircase.
“Vittoria,” Langdon cautioned. “If he’s still in there…”
Vittoria did not seem to hear. She ascended the main portico to the church’s sole wooden
door. Langdon hurried up the stairs behind her. Before he could say a word she had grasped the
handle and pulled. Langdon held his breath. The door did not budge.
“There must be another entrance,” Vittoria said.
“Probably,” Langdon said, exhaling, “but Olivetti will be here in a minute. It’s too dangerous
to go in. We should cover the church from out here until–”
Vittoria turned, her eyes blazing. “If there’s another way in , there’s another way out . If this
guy disappears, we’re fungito .”
Langdon knew enough Italian to know she was right.
The alley on the right side of the church was pinched and dark, with high walls on both sides.
It smelled of urine–a common aroma in a city where bars outnumbered public rest rooms twenty to
one.
Langdon and Vittoria hurried into the fetid dimness. They had gone about fifteen yards down
when Vittoria tugged Langdon’s arm and pointed.
Langdon saw it too. Up ahead was an unassuming wooden door with heavy hinges. Langdon
recognized it as the standard porta sacra –a private entrance for clergy. Most of these entrances had
gone out of use years ago as encroaching buildings and limited real estate relegated side entrances
to inconvenient alleyways.
Vittoria hurried to the door. She arrived and stared down at the doorknob, apparently
perplexed. Langdon arrived behind her and eyed the peculiar donut-shaped hoop hanging where the
doorknob should have been.
“An annulus,” he whispered. Langdon reached out and quietly lifted the ring in his hand. He
pulled the ring toward him. The fixture clicked. Vittoria shifted, looking suddenly uneasy. Quietly,
Langdon twisted the ring clockwise. It spun loosely 360 degrees, not engaging. Langdon frowned
and tried the other direction with the same result.
Vittoria looked down the remainder of the alley. “You think there’s another entrance?”
Langdon doubted it. Most Renaissance cathedrals were designed as makeshift fortresses in the
event a city was stormed. They had as few entrances as possible. “If there is another way in,” he
said, “it’s probably recessed in the rear bastion–more of an escape route than an entrance.”
Vittoria was already on the move.
Langdon followed deeper into the alley. The walls shot skyward on both sides of him.
Somewhere a bell began ringing eight o’clock…
Robert Langdon did not hear Vittoria the first time she called to him. He had slowed at a
stained-glass window covered with bars and was trying to peer inside the church.
“Robert!” Her voice was a loud whisper.
Langdon looked up. Vittoria was at the end of the alley. She was pointing around the back of
the church and waving to him. Langdon jogged reluctantly toward her. At the base of the rear wall,
a stone bulwark jutted out concealing a narrow grotto–a kind of compressed passageway cutting
directly into the foundation of the church.
“An entrance?” Vittoria asked.
Langdon nodded. Actually an exit, but we won’t get technical .
Vittoria knelt and peered into the tunnel. “Let’s check the door. See if it’s open.”
Langdon opened his mouth to object, but Vittoria took his hand and pulled him into the
opening.
“Wait,” Langdon said.
She turned impatiently toward him.
Langdon sighed. “I’ll go first.”
Vittoria looked surprised. “More chivalry?”
“Age before beauty.”
“Was that a compliment?”
Langdon smiled and moved past her into the dark. “Careful on the stairs.”
He inched slowly into the darkness, keeping one hand on the wall. The stone felt sharp on his
fingertips. For an instant Langdon recalled the ancient myth of Daedelus, how the boy kept one
hand on the wall as he moved through the Minotaur’s labyrinth, knowing he was guaranteed to find
the end if he never broke contact with the wall. Langdon moved forward, not entirely certain he
wanted to find the end.
The tunnel narrowed slightly, and Langdon slowed his pace. He sensed Vittoria close behind
him. As the wall curved left, the tunnel opened into a semicircular alcove. Oddly, there was faint
light here. In the dimness Langdon saw the outline of a heavy wooden door.
“Uh oh,” he said.
“Locked?”
“It was .”
“Was?” Vittoria arrived at his side.
Langdon pointed. Lit by a shaft of light coming from within, the door hung ajar… its hinges
splintered by a wrecking bar still lodged in the wood.
They stood a moment in silence. Then, in the dark, Langdon felt Vittoria’s hands on his chest,
groping, sliding beneath his jacket.
“Relax, professor,” she said. “I’m just getting the gun.”
At that moment, inside the Vatican Museums, a task force of Swiss Guards spread out in all
directions. The museum was dark, and the guards wore U.S. Marine issue infrared goggles. The
goggles made everything appear an eerie shade of green. Every guard wore headphones connected
to an antennalike detector that he waved rhythmically in front of him–the same devices they used
twice a week to sweep for electronic bugs inside the Vatican. They moved methodically, checking
behind statues, inside niches, closets, under furniture. The antennae would sound if they detected
even the tiniest magnetic field.
Tonight, however, they were getting no readings at all.
65
The interior of Santa Maria del Popolo was a murky cave in the dimming light. It looked more
like a half-finished subway station than a cathedral. The main sanctuary was an obstacle course of
torn-up flooring, brick pallets, mounds of dirt, wheelbarrows, and even a rusty backhoe. Mammoth
columns rose through the floor, supporting a vaulted roof. In the air, silt drifted lazily in the muted
glow of the stained glass. Langdon stood with Vittoria beneath a sprawling Pinturicchio fresco and
scanned the gutted shrine.
Nothing moved. Dead silence.
Vittoria held the gun out in front of her with both hands. Langdon checked his watch: 8:04
P.M. We’re crazy to be in here , he thought. It’s too dangerous . Still he knew if the killer were
inside, the man could leave through any door he wanted, making a one-gun outside stakeout totally
fruitless. Catching him inside was the only way… that was, if he was even still here. Langdon felt
guilt-ridden over the blunder that had cost everyone their chance at the Pantheon. He was in no
position to insist on precaution now; he was the one who had backed them into this corner.
Vittoria looked harrowed as she scanned the church. “So,” she whispered. “Where is this
Chigi Chapel?”
Langdon gazed through the dusky ghostliness toward the back of the cathedral and studied the
outer walls. Contrary to common perception, Renaissance cathedrals invariably contained multiple
chapels, huge cathedrals like Notre Dame having dozens. Chapels were less rooms than they were
hollows –semicircular niches holding tombs around a church’s perimeter wall.
Bad news , Langdon thought, seeing the four recesses on each side wall. There were eight
chapels in all. Although eight was not a particularly overwhelming number, all eight openings were
covered with huge sheets of clear polyurethane due to the construction, the translucent curtains
apparently intended to keep dust off the tombs inside the alcoves.
“It could be any of those draped recesses,” Langdon said. “No way to know which is the
Chigi without looking inside every one. Could be a good reason to wait for Oliv–”
“Which is the secondary left apse?” she asked.
Langdon studied her, surprised by her command of architectural terminology. “Secondary left
apse?”
Vittoria pointed at the wall behind him. A decorative tile was embedded in the stone. It was
engraved with the same symbol they had seen outside–a pyramid beneath a shining star. The
grime-covered plaque beside it read:
Coat of arms of Alexander Chigi whose tomb is located in the secondary left apse of this
Cathedral
Langdon nodded. Chigi’s coat of arms was a pyramid and star? He suddenly found himself
wondering if the wealthy patron Chigi had been an Illuminatus. He nodded to Vittoria. “Nice work,
Nancy Drew.”
“What?”
“Never mind. I–”
A piece of metal clattered to the floor only yards away. The clang echoed through the entire
church. Langdon pulled Vittoria behind a pillar as she whipped the gun toward the sound and held it
there. Silence. They waited. Again there was sound, this time a rustling. Langdon held his breath. I
never should have let us come in here! The sound moved closer, an intermittent scuffling, like a
man with a limp. Suddenly around the base of the pillar, an object came into view.
“Figlio di puttana!” Vittoria cursed under her breath, jumping back. Langdon fell back with
her.
Beside the pillar, dragging a half-eaten sandwich in paper, was an enormous rat. The creature
paused when it saw them, staring a long moment down the barrel of Vittoria’s weapon, and then,
apparently unmoved, continued dragging its prize off to the recesses of the church.
“Son of a…” Langdon gasped, his heart racing.
Vittoria lowered the gun, quickly regaining her composure. Langdon peered around the side
of the column to see a workman’s lunchbox splayed on the floor, apparently knocked off a
sawhorse by the resourceful rodent.
Langdon scanned the basilica for movement and whispered, “If this guy’s here, he sure as hell
heard that . You sure you don’t want to wait for Olivetti?”
“Secondary left apse,” Vittoria repeated. “Where is it?”
Reluctantly Langdon turned and tried to get his bearings. Cathedral terminology was like
stage directions–totally counterintuitive. He faced the main altar. Stage center . Then he pointed
with his thumb backward over his shoulder.
They both turned and looked where he was pointing.
It seemed the Chigi Chapel was located in the third of four recessed alcoves to their right. The
good news was that Langdon and Vittoria were on the correct side of the church. The bad news
was that they were at the wrong end . They would have to traverse the length of the cathedral,
passing three other chapels, each of them, like the Chigi Chapel, covered with translucent plastic
shrouds.
“Wait,” Langdon said. “I’ll go first.”
“Forget it.”
“I’m the one who screwed up at the Pantheon.”
She turned. “But I’m the one with the gun.”
In her eyes Langdon could see what she was really thinking… I’m the one who lost my father.
I’m the one who helped build a weapon of mass destruction. This guy’s kneecaps are mine …
Langdon sensed the futility and let her go. He moved beside her, cautiously, down the east
side of the basilica. As they passed the first shrouded alcove, Langdon felt taut, like a contestant on
some surreal game show. I’ll take curtain number three , he thought.
The church was quiet, the thick stone walls blocking out all hints of the outside world. As
they hurried past one chapel after the other, pale humanoid forms wavered like ghosts behind the
rustling plastic. Carved marble , Langdon told himself, hoping he was right. It was 8:06 P.M. Had
the killer been punctual and slipped out before Langdon and Vittoria had entered? Or was he still
here? Langdon was unsure which scenario he preferred.
They passed the second apse, ominous in the slowly darkening cathedral. Night seemed to be
falling quickly now, accentuated by the musty tint of the stained-glass windows. As they pressed
on, the plastic curtain beside them billowed suddenly, as if caught in a draft. Langdon wondered if
someone somewhere had opened a door.
Vittoria slowed as the third niche loomed before them. She held the gun before her, motioning
with her head to the stele beside the apse. Carved in the granite block were two words:
Capella Chigi
Langdon nodded. Without a sound they moved to the corner of the opening, positioning
themselves behind a wide pillar. Vittoria leveled the gun around a corner at the plastic. Then she
signaled for Langdon to pull back the shroud.
A good time to start praying , he thought. Reluctantly, he reached over her shoulder. As
carefully as possible, he began to pull the plastic aside. It moved an inch and then crinkled loudly.
They both froze. Silence. After a moment, moving in slow motion, Vittoria leaned forward and
peered through the narrow slit. Langdon looked over her shoulder.
For a moment, neither one of them breathed.
“Empty,” Vittoria finally said, lowering the gun. “We’re too late.”
Langdon did not hear. He was in awe, transported for an instant to another world. In his life,
he had never imagined a chapel that looked like this. Finished entirely in chestnut marble, the Chigi
Chapel was breathtaking. Langdon’s trained eye devoured it in gulps. It was as earthly a chapel as
Langdon could fathom, almost as if Galileo and the Illuminati had designed it themselves.
Overhead, the domed cupola shone with a field of illuminated stars and the seven
astronomical planets. Below that the twelve signs of the zodiac–pagan, earthly symbols rooted in
astronomy. The zodiac was also tied directly to Earth, Air, Fire, Water… the quadrants representing
power, intellect, ardor, emotion. Earth is for power , Langdon recalled.
Farther down the wall, Langdon saw tributes to the Earth’s four temporal seasons–primavera,
estate, autunno, invérno . But far more incredible than any of this were the two huge structures
dominating the room. Langdon stared at them in silent wonder. It can’t be , he thought. It just can’t
be! But it was. On either side of the chapel, in perfect symmetry, were two ten-foot-high marble
pyramids.
“I don’t see a cardinal,” Vittoria whispered. “Or an assassin.” She pulled aside the plastic and
stepped in.
Langdon’s eyes were transfixed on the pyramids. What are pyramids doing inside a Christian
chapel? And incredibly, there was more. Dead center of each pyramid, embedded in their anterior
façades, were gold medallions… medallions like few Langdon had ever seen… perfect ellipses .
The burnished disks glimmered in the setting sun as it sifted through the cupola. Galileo’s ellipses?
Pyramids? A cupola of stars? The room had more Illuminati significance than any room Langdon
could have fabricated in his mind.
“Robert,” Vittoria blurted, her voice cracking. “Look!”
Langdon wheeled, reality returning as his eyes dropped to where she was pointing. “Bloody
hell!” he shouted, jumping backward.
Sneering up at them from the floor was the image of a skeleton–an intricately detailed, marble
mosaic depicting “death in flight.” The skeleton was carrying a tablet portraying the same pyramid
and stars they had seen outside. It was not the image, however, that had turned Langdon’s blood
cold. It was the fact that the mosaic was mounted on a circular stone–a cupermento –that had been
lifted out of the floor like a manhole cover and was now sitting off to one side of a dark opening in
the floor.
“Demon’s hole,” Langdon gasped. He had been so taken with the ceiling he had not even seen
it. Tentatively he moved toward the pit. The stench coming up was overwhelming.
Vittoria put a hand over her mouth. “Che puzzo .”
“Effluvium,” Langdon said. “Vapors from decaying bone.” He breathed through his sleeve as
he leaned out over the hole, peering down. Blackness. “I can’t see a thing.”
“You think anybody’s down there?”
“No way to know.”
Vittoria motioned to the far side of the hole where a rotting, wooden ladder descended into the
depths.
Langdon shook his head. “Like hell.”
“Maybe there’s a flashlight outside in those tools.” She sounded eager for an excuse to escape
the smell. “I’ll look.”
“Careful!” Langdon warned. “We don’t know for sure that the Hassassin–”
But Vittoria was already gone.
One strong-willed woman , Langdon thought.
As he turned back to the pit, he felt light-headed from the fumes. Holding his breath, he
dropped his head below the rim and peered deep into the darkness. Slowly, as his eyes adjusted, he
began to see faint shapes below. The pit appeared to open into a small chamber. Demon’s hole . He
wondered how many generations of Chigis had been unceremoniously dumped in. Langdon closed
his eyes and waited, forcing his pupils to dilate so he could see better in the dark. When he opened
his eyes again, a pale muted figure hovered below in the darkness. Langdon shivered but fought the
instinct to pull out. Am I seeing things? Is that a body? The figure faded. Langdon closed his eyes
again and waited, longer this time, so his eyes would pick up the faintest light.
Dizziness started to set in, and his thoughts wandered in the blackness. Just a few more
seconds . He wasn’t sure if it was breathing the fumes or holding his head at a low inclination, but
Langdon was definitely starting to feel squeamish. When he finally opened his eyes again, the
image before him was totally inexplicable.
He was now staring at a crypt bathed in an eerie bluish light. A faint hissing sound
reverberated in his ears. Light flickered on the steep walls of the shaft. Suddenly, a long shadow
materialized over him. Startled, Langdon scrambled up.
“Look out!” someone exclaimed behind him.
Before Langdon could turn, he felt a sharp pain on the back of his neck. He spun to see
Vittoria twisting a lit blowtorch away from him, the hissing flame throwing blue light around the
chapel.
Langdon grabbed his neck. “What the hell are you doing?”
“I was giving you some light,” she said. “You backed right into me.”
Langdon glared at the portable blowtorch in her hand.
“Best I could do,” she said. “No flashlights.”
Langdon rubbed his neck. “I didn’t hear you come in.”
Vittoria handed him the torch, wincing again at the stench of the crypt. “You think those
fumes are combustible?”
“Let’s hope not.”
He took the torch and moved slowly toward the hole. Cautiously, he advanced to the rim and
pointed the flame down into the hole, lighting the side wall. As he directed the light, his eyes traced
the outline of the wall downward. The crypt was circular and about twenty feet across. Thirty feet
down, the glow found the floor. The ground was dark and mottled. Earthy. Then Langdon saw the
body.
His instinct was to recoil. “He’s here,” Langdon said, forcing himself not to turn away. The
figure was a pallid outline against the earthen floor. “I think he’s been stripped naked.” Langdon
flashed on the nude corpse of Leonardo Vetra.
“Is it one of the cardinals?”
Langdon had no idea, but he couldn’t imagine who the hell else it would be. He stared down
at the pale blob. Unmoving. Lifeless. And yet … Langdon hesitated. There was something very
strange about the way the figure was positioned. He seemed to be…
Langdon called out. “Hello?”
“You think he’s alive?”
There was no response from below.
“He’s not moving,” Langdon said. “But he looks…” No, impossible .
“He looks what ?” Vittoria was peering over the edge now too.
Langdon squinted into the darkness. “He looks like he’s standing up.”
Vittoria held her breath and lowered her face over the edge for a better look. After a moment,
she pulled back. “You’re right. He’s standing up! Maybe he’s alive and needs help!” She called into
the hole. “Hello?! Mi puó sentire? ”
There was no echo off the mossy interior. Only silence.
Vittoria headed for the rickety ladder. “I’m going down.”
Langdon caught her arm. “No. It’s dangerous. I’ll go.”
This time Vittoria didn’t argue.
66
Chinita Macri was mad. She sat in the passenger’s seat of the BBC van as it idled at a corner
on Via Tomacelli. Gunther Glick was checking his map of Rome, apparently lost. As she had
feared, his mystery caller had phoned back, this time with information.
“Piazza del Popolo,” Glick insisted. “That’s what we’re looking for. There’s a church there.
And inside is proof.”
“Proof.” Chinita stopped polishing the lens in her hand and turned to him. “Proof that a
cardinal has been murdered?”
“That’s what he said.”
“You believe everything you hear?” Chinita wished, as she often did, that she was the one in
charge. Videographers, however, were at the whim of the crazy reporters for whom they shot
footage. If Gunther Glick wanted to follow a feeble phone tip, Macri was his dog on a leash.
She looked at him, sitting there in the driver’s seat, his jaw set intently. The man’s parents,
she decided, must have been frustrated comedians to have given him a name like Gunther Glick. No
wonder the guy felt like he had something to prove. Nonetheless, despite his unfortunate appellative
and annoying eagerness to make a mark, Glick was sweet… charming in a pasty, Briddish ,
unstrung sort of way. Like Hugh Grant on lithium.
“Shouldn’t we be back at St. Peter’s?” Macri said as patiently as possible. “We can check this
mystery church out later. Conclave started an hour ago. What if the cardinals come to a decision
while we’re gone?”
Glick did not seem to hear. “I think we go to the right, here.” He tilted the map and studied it
again. “Yes, if I take a right… and then an immediate left.” He began to pull out onto the narrow
street before them.
“Look out!” Macri yelled. She was a video technician, and her eyes were sharp. Fortunately,
Glick was pretty fast too. He slammed on the brakes and avoided entering the intersection just as a
line of four Alpha Romeos appeared out of nowhere and tore by in a blur. Once past, the cars
skidded, decelerating, and cut sharply left one block ahead, taking the exact route Glick had
intended to take.
“Maniacs!” Macri shouted.
Glick looked shaken. “Did you see that?”
“Yeah, I saw that! They almost killed us!”
“No, I mean the cars,” Glick said, his voice suddenly excited. “They were all the same.”
“So they were maniacs with no imagination.”
“The cars were also full.”
“So what?”
“Four identical cars, all with four passengers?”
“You ever heard of carpooling?”
“In Italy?” Glick checked the intersection. “They haven’t even heard of unleaded gas.” He hit
the accelerator and peeled out after the cars.
Macri was thrown back in her seat. “What the hell are you doing?”
Glick accelerated down the street and hung a left after the Alpha Romeos. “Something tells
me you and I are not the only ones going to church right now.”
67
The descent was slow.
Langdon dropped rung by rung down the creaking ladder… deeper and deeper beneath the
floor of the Chigi Chapel. Into the Demon’s hole , he thought. He was facing the side wall, his back
to the chamber, and he wondered how many more dark, cramped spaces one day could provide. The
ladder groaned with every step, and the pungent smell of rotting flesh and dampness was almost
asphyxiating. Langdon wondered where the hell Olivetti was.
Vittoria’s outline was still visible above, holding the blowtorch inside the hole, lighting
Langdon’s way. As he lowered himself deeper into the darkness, the bluish glow from above got
fainter. The only thing that got stronger was the stench.
Twelve rungs down, it happened. Langdon’s foot hit a spot that was slippery with decay, and
he faltered. Lunging forward, he caught the ladder with his forearms to avoid plummeting to the
bottom. Cursing the bruises now throbbing on his arms, he dragged his body back onto the ladder
and began his descent again.
Three rungs deeper, he almost fell again, but this time it was not a rung that caused the
mishap. It was a bolt of fear. He had descended past a hollowed niche in the wall before him and
suddenly found himself face to face with a collection of skulls. As he caught his breath and looked
around him, he realized the wall at this level was honeycombed with shelflike openings–burial
niches–all filled with skeletons. In the phosphorescent light, it made for an eerie collage of empty
sockets and decaying rib cages flickering around him.
Skeletons by firelight , he grimaced wryly, realizing he had quite coincidentally endured a
similar evening just last month. An evening of bones and flames . The New York Museum of
Archeology’s candlelight benefit dinner–salmon flambé in the shadow of a brontosaurus skeleton.
He had attended at the invitation of Rebecca Strauss–one-time fashion model now art critic from the
Times , a whirlwind of black velvet, cigarettes, and not-so-subtly enhanced breasts. She’d called
him twice since. Langdon had not returned her calls. Most ungentlemanly , he chided, wondering
how long Rebecca Strauss would last in a stink-pit like this.
Langdon was relieved to feel the final rung give way to the spongy earth at the bottom. The
ground beneath his shoes felt damp. Assuring himself the walls were not going to close in on him,
he turned into the crypt. It was circular, about twenty feet across. Breathing through his sleeve
again, Langdon turned his eyes to the body. In the gloom, the image was hazy. A white, fleshy
outline. Facing the other direction. Motionless. Silent.
Advancing through the murkiness of the crypt, Langdon tried to make sense of what he was
looking at. The man had his back to Langdon, and Langdon could not see his face, but he did
indeed seem to be standing.
“Hello?” Langdon choked through his sleeve. Nothing. As he drew nearer, he realized the
man was very short. Too short …
“What’s happening?” Vittoria called from above, shifting the light.
Langdon did not answer. He was now close enough to see it all. With a tremor of repulsion,
he understood. The chamber seemed to contract around him. Emerging like a demon from the
earthen floor was an old man… or at least half of him. He was buried up to his waist in the earth.
Standing upright with half of him below ground. Stripped naked. His hands tied behind his back
with a red cardinal’s sash. He was propped limply upward, spine arched backward like some sort of
hideous punching bag. The man’s head lay backward, eyes toward the heavens as if pleading for
help from God himself.
“Is he dead?” Vittoria called.
Langdon moved toward the body. I hope so, for his sake . As he drew to within a few feet, he
looked down at the upturned eyes. They bulged outward, blue and bloodshot. Langdon leaned down
to listen for breath but immediately recoiled. “For Christ’s sake!”
“What!”
Langdon almost gagged. “He’s dead all right. I just saw the cause of death.” The sight was
gruesome. The man’s mouth had been jammed open and packed solid with dirt. “Somebody stuffed
a fistful of dirt down his throat. He suffocated.”
“Dirt?” Vittoria said. “As in… earth ?”
Langdon did a double take. Earth . He had almost forgotten. The brands. Earth, Air, Fire,
Water . The killer had threatened to brand each victim with one of the ancient elements of science.
The first element was Earth. From Santi’s earthly tomb . Dizzy from the fumes, Langdon circled to
the front of the body. As he did, the symbologist within him loudly reasserted the artistic challenge
of creating the mythical ambigram. Earth? How? And yet, an instant later, it was before him.
Centuries of Illuminati legend whirled in his mind. The marking on the cardinal’s chest was charred
and oozing. The flesh was seared black. La lingua pura …
Langdon stared at the brand as the room began to spin.
“Earth,” he whispered, tilting his head to see the symbol upside down. “Earth.”
Then, in a wave of horror, he had one final cognition. There are three more .
68
Despite the soft glow of candlelight in the Sistine Chapel, Cardinal Mortati was on edge.
Conclave had officially begun. And it had begun in a most inauspicious fashion.
Half an hour ago, at the appointed hour, Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca had entered the chapel.
He walked to the front altar and gave opening prayer. Then, he unfolded his hands and spoke to
them in a tone as direct as anything Mortati had ever heard from the altar of the Sistine.
“You are well aware,” the camerlegno said, “that our four preferiti are not present in
conclave at this moment. I ask, in the name of his late Holiness, that you proceed as you must…
with faith and purpose. May you have only God before your eyes.” Then he turned to go.
“But,” one cardinal blurted out, “where are they?”
The camerlegno paused. “That I cannot honestly say.”
“When will they return?”
“That I cannot honestly say.”
“Are they okay?”
“That I cannot honestly say.”
“Will they return?”
There was a long pause.
“Have faith,” the camerlegno said. Then he walked out of the room.
The doors to the Sistine Chapel had been sealed, as was the custom, with two heavy chains on
the outside. Four Swiss Guards stood watch in the hallway beyond. Mortati knew the only way the
doors could be opened now, prior to electing a Pope, was if someone inside fell deathly ill, or if the
preferiti arrived. Mortati prayed it would be the latter, although from the knot in his stomach he
was not so sure.
Proceed as we must , Mortati decided, taking his lead from the resolve in the camerlegno’s
voice. So he had called for a vote. What else could he do?
It had taken thirty minutes to complete the preparatory rituals leading up to this first vote.
Mortati had waited patiently at the main altar as each cardinal, in order of seniority, had approached
and performed the specific balloting procedure.
Now, at last, the final cardinal had arrived at the altar and was kneeling before him.
“I call as my witness,” the cardinal declared, exactly as those before him, “Christ the Lord,
who will be my judge that my vote is given to the one who before God I think should be elected.”
The cardinal stood up. He held his ballot high over his head for everyone to see. Then he
lowered the ballot to the altar, where a plate sat atop a large chalice. He placed the ballot on the
plate. Next he picked up the plate and used it to drop the ballot into the chalice. Use of the plate was
to ensure no one secretly dropped multiple ballots.
After he had submitted his ballot, he replaced the plate over the chalice, bowed to the cross,
and returned to his seat.
The final ballot had been cast.
Now it was time for Mortati to go to work.
Leaving the plate on top of the chalice, Mortati shook the ballots to mix them. Then he
removed the plate and extracted a ballot at random. He unfolded it. The ballot was exactly two
inches wide. He read aloud for everyone to hear.
“Eligo in summum pontificem …” he declared, reading the text that was embossed at the top
of every ballot. I elect as Supreme Pontiff … Then he announced the nominee’s name that had been
written beneath it. After he read the name, he raised a threaded needle and pierced the ballot
through the word Eligo , carefully sliding the ballot onto the thread. Then he made note of the vote
in a logbook.
Next, he repeated the entire procedure. He chose a ballot from the chalice, read it aloud,
threaded it onto the line, and made note in his log. Almost immediately, Mortati sensed this first
vote would be failed. No consensus. After only seven ballots, already seven different cardinals had
been named. As was normal, the handwriting on each ballot was disguised by block printing or
flamboyant script. The concealment was ironic in this case because the cardinals were obviously
submitting votes for themselves. This apparent conceit, Mortati knew, had nothing to do with
self-centered ambition. It was a holding pattern. A defensive maneuver. A stall tactic to ensure no
cardinal received enough votes to win… and another vote would be forced.
The cardinals were waiting for their preferiti …
When the last of the ballots had been tallied, Mortati declared the vote “failed.”
He took the thread carrying all the ballots and tied the ends together to create a ring. Then he
lay the ring of ballots on a silver tray. He added the proper chemicals and carried the tray to a small
chimney behind him. Here he lit the ballots. As the ballots burned, the chemicals he’d added created
black smoke. The smoke flowed up a pipe to a hole in the roof where it rose above the chapel for all
to see. Cardinal Mortati had just sent his first communication to the outside world.
One balloting. No Pope.
69
Nearly asphyxiated by fumes, Langdon struggled up the ladder toward the light at the top of
the pit. Above him he heard voices, but nothing was making sense. His head was spinning with
images of the branded cardinal.
Earth … Earth …
As he pushed upward, his vision narrowed and he feared consciousness would slip away. Two
rungs from the top, his balance faltered. He lunged upward trying to find the lip, but it was too far.
He lost his grip on the ladder and almost tumbled backward into the dark. There was a sharp pain
under his arms, and suddenly Langdon was airborne, legs swinging wildly out over the chasm.
The strong hands of two Swiss Guards hooked him under the armpits and dragged him
skyward. A moment later Langdon’s head emerged from the Demon’s hole, choking and gasping
for air. The guards dragged him over the lip of the opening, across the floor, and lay him down,
back against the cold marble floor.
For a moment, Langdon was unsure where he was. Overhead he saw stars… orbiting planets.
Hazy figures raced past him. People were shouting. He tried to sit up. He was lying at the base of a
stone pyramid. The familiar bite of an angry tongue echoed inside the chapel, and then Langdon
knew.
Olivetti was screaming at Vittoria. “Why the hell didn’t you figure that out in the first place!”
Vittoria was trying to explain the situation.
Olivetti cut her off midsentence and turned to bark orders to his men. “Get that body out of
there! Search the rest of the building!”
Langdon tried to sit up. The Chigi Chapel was packed with Swiss Guards. The plastic curtain
over the chapel opening had been torn off the entryway, and fresh air filled Langdon’s lungs. As his
senses slowly returned, Langdon saw Vittoria coming toward him. She knelt down, her face like an
angel.
“You okay?” Vittoria took his arm and felt his pulse. Her hands were tender on his skin.
“Thanks.” Langdon sat up fully. “Olivetti’s mad.”
Vittoria nodded. “He has a right to be. We blew it.”
“You mean I blew it.”
“So redeem yourself. Get him next time.”
Next time? Langdon thought it was a cruel comment. There is no next time! We missed our
shot!
Vittoria checked Langdon’s watch. “Mickey says we’ve got forty minutes. Get your head
together and help me find the next marker.”
“I told you, Vittoria, the sculptures are gone. The Path of Illumination is–” Langdon halted.
Vittoria smiled softly.
Suddenly Langdon was staggering to his feet. He turned dizzying circles, staring at the
artwork around him. Pyramids, stars, planets, ellipses . Suddenly everything came back. This is the
first altar of science! Not the Pantheon! It dawned on him now how perfectly Illuminati the chapel
was, far more subtle and selective than the world famous Pantheon. The Chigi was an out of the
way alcove, a literal hole-in-the-wall, a tribute to a great patron of science, decorated with earthly
symbology. Perfect .
Langdon steadied himself against the wall and gazed up at the enormous pyramid sculptures.
Vittoria was dead right. If this chapel was the first altar of science, it might still contain the
Illuminati sculpture that served as the first marker. Langdon felt an electrifying rush of hope to
realize there was still a chance. If the marker were indeed here, and they could follow it to the next
altar of science, they might have another chance to catch the killer.
Vittoria moved closer. “I found out who the unknown Illuminati sculptor was.”
Langdon’s head whipped around. “You what ?”
“Now we just need to figure out which sculpture in here is the–”
“Wait a minute! You know who the Illuminati sculptor was?” He had spent years trying to
find that information.
Vittoria smiled. “It was Bernini.” She paused. “The Bernini.”
Langdon immediately knew she was mistaken. Bernini was an impossibility. Gianlorenzo
Bernini was the second most famous sculptor of all time, his fame eclipsed only by Michelangelo
himself. During the 1600s Bernini created more sculptures than any other artist. Unfortunately, the
man they were looking for was supposedly an unknown, a nobody.
Vittoria frowned. “You don’t look excited.”
“Bernini is impossible.”
“Why? Bernini was a contemporary of Galileo. He was a brilliant sculptor.”
“He was a very famous man and a Catholic.”
“Yes,” Vittoria said. “Exactly like Galileo.”
“No,” Langdon argued. “Nothing like Galileo. Galileo was a thorn in the Vatican’s side.
Bernini was the Vatican’s wonder boy. The church loved Bernini. He was elected the Vatican’s
overall artistic authority. He practically lived inside Vatican City his entire life!”
“A perfect cover. Illuminati infiltration.”
Langdon felt flustered. “Vittoria, the Illuminati members referred to their secret artist as il
maestro ignoto –the unknown master.”
“Yes, unknown to them . Think of the secrecy of the Masons–only the upper-echelon
members knew the whole truth. Galileo could have kept Bernini’s true identity secret from most
members… for Bernini’s own safety. That way, the Vatican would never find out.”
Langdon was unconvinced but had to admit Vittoria’s logic made strange sense. The
Illuminati were famous for keeping secret information compartmentalized, only revealing the truth
to upper-level members. It was the cornerstone of their ability to stay secret… very few knew the
whole story.
“And Bernini’s affiliation with the Illuminati,” Vittoria added with a smile, “explains why he
designed those two pyramids.”
Langdon turned to the huge sculpted pyramids and shook his head. “Bernini was a religious
sculptor. There’s no way he carved those pyramids.”
Vittoria shrugged. “Tell that to the sign behind you.”
Langdon turned to the plaque:
ART OF THE CHIGI CHAPEL
While the architecture is Raphael’s, all interior adornments are those of Gianlorenzo Bernini.
Langdon read the plaque twice, and still he was not convinced. Gianlorenzo Bernini was
celebrated for his intricate, holy sculptures of the Virgin Mary, angels, prophets, Popes. What was
he doing carving pyramids ?
Langdon looked up at the towering monuments and felt totally disoriented. Two pyramids,
each with a shining, elliptical medallion. They were about as un-Christian as sculpture could get.
The pyramids, the stars above, the signs of the Zodiac. All interior adornments are those of
Gianlorenzo Bernini . If that were true, Langdon realized, it meant Vittoria had to be right. By
default, Bernini was the Illuminati’s unknown master; nobody else had contributed artwork to this
chapel! The implications came almost too fast for Langdon to process.
Bernini was an Illuminatus .
Bernini designed the Illuminati ambigrams .
Bernini laid out the path of Illumination .
Langdon could barely speak. Could it be that here in this tiny Chigi Chapel, the
world-renowned Bernini had placed a sculpture that pointed across Rome toward the next altar of
science?
“Bernini,” he said. “I never would have guessed.”
“Who other than a famous Vatican artist would have had the clout to put his artwork in
specific Catholic chapels around Rome and create the Path of Illumination? Certainly not an
unknown.”
Langdon considered it. He looked at the pyramids, wondering if one of them could somehow
be the marker. Maybe both of them? “The pyramids face opposite directions,” Langdon said, not
sure what to make of them. “They are also identical, so I don’t know which…”
“I don’t think the pyramids are what we’re looking for.”
“But they’re the only sculptures here.”
Vittoria cut him off by pointing toward Olivetti and some of his guards who were gathered
near the demon’s hole.
Langdon followed the line of her hand to the far wall. At first he saw nothing. Then someone
moved and he caught a glimpse. White marble. An arm. A torso. And then a sculpted face. Partially
hidden in its niche. Two life-size human figures intertwined. Langdon’s pulse accelerated. He had
been so taken with the pyramids and demon’s hole, he had not even seen this sculpture. He moved
across the room, through the crowd. As he drew near, Langdon recognized the work was pure
Bernini–the intensity of the artistic composition, the intricate faces and flowing clothing, all from
the purest white marble Vatican money could buy. It was not until he was almost directly in front of
it that Langdon recognized the sculpture itself. He stared up at the two faces and gasped.
“Who are they?” Vittoria urged, arriving behind him.
Langdon stood astonished. “Habakkuk and the Angel ,” he said, his voice almost inaudible.
The piece was a fairly well-known Bernini work that was included in some art history texts.
Langdon had forgotten it was here.
“Habakkuk?”
“Yes. The prophet who predicted the annihilation of the earth.”
Vittoria looked uneasy. “You think this is the marker?”
Langdon nodded in amazement. Never in his life had he been so sure of anything. This was
the first Illuminati marker. No doubt. Although Langdon had fully expected the sculpture to
somehow “point” to the next altar of science, he did not expect it to be literal . Both the angel and
Habakkuk had their arms outstretched and were pointing into the distance.
Langdon found himself suddenly smiling. “Not too subtle, is it?”
Vittoria looked excited but confused. “I see them pointing, but they are contradicting each
other. The angel is pointing one way, and the prophet the other.”
Langdon chuckled. It was true. Although both figures were pointing into the distance, they
were pointing in totally opposite directions. Langdon, however, had already solved that problem.
With a burst of energy he headed for the door.
“Where are you going?” Vittoria called.
“Outside the building!” Langdon’s legs felt light again as he ran toward the door. “I need to
see what direction that sculpture is pointing!”
“Wait! How do you know which finger to follow?”
“The poem,” he called over his shoulder. “The last line!”
“ ‘Let angels guide you on your lofty quest?’ ” She gazed upward at the outstretched finger of
the angel. Her eyes misted unexpectedly. “Well I’ll be damned!”
70
Gunther Glick and Chinita Macri sat parked in the BBC van in the shadows at the far end of
Piazza del Popolo. They had arrived shortly after the four Alpha Romeos, just in time to witness an
inconceivable chain of events. Chinita still had no idea what it all meant, but she’d made sure the
camera was rolling.
As soon as they’d arrived, Chinita and Glick had seen a veritable army of young men pour out
of the Alpha Romeos and surround the church. Some had weapons drawn. One of them, a stiff older
man, led a team up the front steps of the church. The soldiers drew guns and blew the locks off the
front doors. Macri heard nothing and figured they must have had silencers. Then the soldiers
entered.
Chinita had recommended they sit tight and film from the shadows. After all, guns were guns,
and they had a clear view of the action from the van. Glick had not argued. Now, across the piazza,
men moved in and out of the church. They yelled to each other. Chinita adjusted her camera to
follow a team as they searched the surrounding area. All of them, though dressed in civilian clothes,
seemed to move with military precision. “Who do you think they are?” she asked.
“Hell if I know.” Glick looked riveted. “You getting all this?”
“Every frame.”
Glick sounded smug. “Still think we should go back to Pope-Watch?”
Chinita wasn’t sure what to say. There was obviously something going on here, but she had
been in journalism long enough to know that there was often a very dull explanation for interesting
events. “This could be nothing,” she said. “These guys could have gotten the same tip you got and
are just checking it out. Could be a false alarm.”
Glick grabbed her arm. “Over there! Focus.” He pointed back to the church.
Chinita swung the camera back to the top of the stairs. “Hello there,” she said, training on the
man now emerging from the church.
“Who’s the dapper?”
Chinita moved in for a close-up. “Haven’t seen him before.” She tightened in on the man’s
face and smiled. “But I wouldn’t mind seeing him again.”
Robert Langdon dashed down the stairs outside the church and into the middle of the piazza.
It was getting dark now, the springtime sun setting late in southern Rome. The sun had dropped
below the surrounding buildings, and shadows streaked the square.
“Okay, Bernini,” he said aloud to himself. “Where the hell is your angel pointing?”
He turned and examined the orientation of the church from which he had just come. He
pictured the Chigi Chapel inside, and the sculpture of the angel inside that. Without hesitation he
turned due west, into the glow of the impending sunset. Time was evaporating.
“Southwest,” he said, scowling at the shops and apartments blocking his view. “The next
marker is out there.”
Racking his brain, Langdon pictured page after page of Italian art history. Although very
familiar with Bernini’s work, Langdon knew the sculptor had been far too prolific for any
nonspecialist to know all of it. Still, considering the relative fame of the first marker–Habakkuk and
the Angel –Langdon hoped the second marker was a work he might know from memory.
Earth, Air, Fire, Water , he thought. Earth they had found–inside the Chapel of the
Earth–Habakkuk, the prophet who predicted the earth’s annihilation.
Air is next. Langdon urged himself to think. A Bernini sculpture that has something to do
with Air! He was drawing a total blank. Still he felt energized. I’m on the path of Illumination! It is
still intact!
Looking southwest, Langdon strained to see a spire or cathedral tower jutting up over the
obstacles. He saw nothing. He needed a map. If they could figure out what churches were southwest
of here, maybe one of them would spark Langdon’s memory. Air , he pressed. Air. Bernini.
Sculpture. Air. Think!
Langdon turned and headed back up the cathedral stairs. He was met beneath the scaffolding
by Vittoria and Olivetti.
“Southwest,” Langdon said, panting. “The next church is southwest of here.”
Olivetti’s whisper was cold. “You sure this time?”
Langdon didn’t bite. “We need a map. One that shows all the churches in Rome.”
The commander studied him a moment, his expression never changing.
Langdon checked his watch. “We only have half an hour.”
Olivetti moved past Langdon down the stairs toward his car, parked directly in front of the
cathedral. Langdon hoped he was going for a map.
Vittoria looked excited. “So the angel’s pointing southwest? No idea which churches are
southwest?”
“I can’t see past the damn buildings.” Langdon turned and faced the square again. “And I
don’t know Rome’s churches well enou–” He stopped.
Vittoria looked startled. “What?”
Langdon looked out at the piazza again. Having ascended the church stairs, he was now
higher, and his view was better. He still couldn’t see anything, but he realized he was moving in the
right direction. His eyes climbed the tower of rickety scaffolding above him. It rose six stories,
almost to the top of the church’s rose window, far higher than the other buildings in the square. He
knew in an instant where he was headed.
Across the square, Chinita Macri and Gunther Glick sat glued to the windshield of the BBC
van.
“You getting this?” Gunther asked.
Macri tightened her shot on the man now climbing the scaffolding. “He’s a little well dressed
to be playing Spiderman if you ask me.”
“And who’s Ms. Spidey?”
Chinita glanced at the attractive woman beneath the scaffolding. “Bet you’d like to find out.”
“Think I should call editorial?”
“Not yet. Let’s watch. Better to have something in the can before we admit we abandoned
conclave.”
“You think somebody really killed one of the old farts in there?”
Chinita clucked. “You’re definitely going to hell.”
“And I’ll be taking the Pulitzer with me.”
71
The scaffolding seemed less stable the higher Langdon climbed. His view of Rome, however,
got better with every step. He continued upward.
He was breathing harder than he expected when he reached the upper tier. He pulled himself
onto the last platform, brushed off the plaster, and stood up. The height did not bother him at all. In
fact, it was invigorating.
The view was staggering. Like an ocean on fire, the red-tiled rooftops of Rome spread out
before him, glowing in the scarlet sunset. From that spot, for the first time in his life, Langdon saw
beyond the pollution and traffic of Rome to its ancient roots–Citt? di Dio –The city of God.
Squinting into the sunset, Langdon scanned the rooftops for a church steeple or bell tower.
But as he looked farther and farther toward the horizon, he saw nothing. There are hundreds of
churches in Rome , he thought. There must be one southwest of here! If the church is even visible ,
he reminded himself. Hell, if the church is even still standing!
Forcing his eyes to trace the line slowly, he attempted the search again. He knew, of course,
that not all churches would have visible spires, especially smaller, out-of-the-way sanctuaries. Not
to mention, Rome had changed dramatically since the 1600s when churches were by law the tallest
buildings allowed. Now, as Langdon looked out, he saw apartment buildings, high-rises, TV towers.
For the second time, Langdon’s eye reached the horizon without seeing anything. Not one
single spire. In the distance, on the very edge of Rome, Michelangelo’s massive dome blotted the
setting sun. St. Peter’s Basilica. Vatican City. Langdon found himself wondering how the cardinals
were faring, and if the Swiss Guards’ search had turned up the antimatter. Something told him it
hadn’t… and wouldn’t.
The poem was rattling through his head again. He considered it, carefully, line by line. From
Santi’s earthly tomb with demon’s hole . They had found Santi’s tomb. ‘Cross Rome the mystic
elements unfold . The mystic elements were Earth, Air, Fire, Water. The path of light is laid, the
sacred test . The path of Illumination formed by Bernini’s sculptures. Let angels guide you on your
lofty quest .
The angel was pointing southwest…
“Front stairs!” Glick exclaimed, pointing wildly through the windshield of the BBC van.
“Something’s going on!”
Macri dropped her shot back down to the main entrance. Something was definitely going on.
At the bottom of the stairs, the military-looking man had pulled one of the Alpha Romeos close to
the stairs and opened the trunk. Now he was scanning the square as if checking for onlookers. For a
moment, Macri thought the man had spotted them, but his eyes kept moving. Apparently satisfied,
he pulled out a walkie-talkie and spoke into it.
Almost instantly, it seemed an army emerged from the church. Like an American football
team breaking from a huddle, the soldiers formed a straight line across the top of the stairs. Moving
like a human wall, they began to descend. Behind them, almost entirely hidden by the wall, four
soldiers seemed to be carrying something. Something heavy. Awkward.
Glick leaned forward on the dashboard. “Are they stealing something from the church?”
Chinita tightened her shot even more, using the telephoto to probe the wall of men, looking
for an opening. One split second , she willed. A single frame. That’s all I need . But the men moved
as one. Come on! Macri stayed with them, and it paid off. When the soldiers tried to lift the object
into the trunk, Macri found her opening. Ironically, it was the older man who faltered. Only for an
instant, but long enough. Macri had her frame. Actually, it was more like ten frames.
“Call editorial,” Chinita said. “We’ve got a dead body.”
Far away, at CERN, Maximilian Kohler maneuvered his wheelchair into Leonardo Vetra’s
study. With mechanical efficiency, he began sifting through Vetra’s files. Not finding what he was
after, Kohler moved to Vetra’s bedroom. The top drawer of his bedside table was locked. Kohler
pried it open with a knife from the kitchen.
Inside Kohler found exactly what he was looking for.
72
Langdon swung off the scaffolding and dropped back to the ground. He brushed the plaster
dust from his clothes. Vittoria was there to greet him.
“No luck?” she said.
He shook his head.
“They put the cardinal in the trunk.”
Langdon looked over to the parked car where Olivetti and a group of soldiers now had a map
spread out on the hood. “Are they looking southwest?”
She nodded. “No churches. From here the first one you hit is St. Peter’s.”
Langdon grunted. At least they were in agreement. He moved toward Olivetti. The soldiers
parted to let him through.
Olivetti looked up. “Nothing. But this doesn’t show every last church. Just the big ones.
About fifty of them.”
“Where are we?” Langdon asked.
Olivetti pointed to Piazza del Popolo and traced a straight line exactly southwest. The line
missed, by a substantial margin, the cluster of black squares indicating Rome’s major churches.
Unfortunately, Rome’s major churches were also Rome’s older churches… those that would have
been around in the 1600s.
“I’ve got some decisions to make,” Olivetti said. “Are you certain of the direction?”
Langdon pictured the angel’s outstretched finger, the urgency rising in him again. “Yes, sir.
Positive.”
Olivetti shrugged and traced the straight line again. The path intersected the Margherita
Bridge, Via Cola di Riezo, and passed through Piazza del Risorgimento, hitting no churches at all
until it dead-ended abruptly at the center of St. Peter’s Square.
“What’s wrong with St. Peter’s?” one of the soldiers said. He had a deep scar under his left
eye. “It’s a church.”
Langdon shook his head. “Needs to be a public place. Hardly seems public at the moment.”
“But the line goes through St. Peter’s Square ,” Vittoria added, looking over Langdon’s
shoulder. “The square is public.”
Langdon had already considered it. “No statues, though.”
“Isn’t there a monolith in the middle?”
She was right. There was an Egyptian monolith in St. Peter’s Square. Langdon looked out at
the monolith in the piazza in front of them. The lofty pyramid . An odd coincidence, he thought. He
shook it off. “The Vatican’s monolith is not by Bernini. It was brought in by Caligula. And it has
nothing to do with Air .” There was another problem as well. “Besides, the poem says the elements
are spread across Rome . St. Peter’s Square is in Vatican City. Not Rome.”
“Depends who you ask,” a guard interjected.
Langdon looked up. “What?”
“Always a bone of contention. Most maps show St. Peter’s Square as part of Vatican City, but
because it’s outside the walled city, Roman officials for centuries have claimed it as part of
Rome.”
“You’re kidding,” Langdon said. He had never known that.
“I only mention it,” the guard continued, “because Commander Olivetti and Ms. Vetra were
asking about a sculpture that had to do with Air.”
Langdon was wide-eyed. “And you know of one in St. Peter’s Square?”
“Not exactly. It’s not really a sculpture. Probably not relevant.”
“Let’s hear it,” Olivetti pressed.
The guard shrugged. “The only reason I know about it is because I’m usually on piazza duty. I
know every corner of St. Peter’s Square.”
“The sculpture,” Langdon urged. “What does it look like?” Langdon was starting to wonder if
the Illuminati could really have been gutsy enough to position their second marker right outside St.
Peter’s Church.
“I patrol past it every day,” the guard said. “It’s in the center, directly where that line is
pointing. That’s what made me think of it. As I said, it’s not really a sculpture. It’s more of a…
block.”
Olivetti looked mad. “A block?”
“Yes, sir. A marble block embedded in the square. At the base of the monolith. But the block
is not a rectangle. It’s an ellipse. And the block is carved with the image of a billowing gust of
wind.” He paused. “Air , I suppose, if you wanted to get scientific about it.”
Langdon stared at the young soldier in amazement. “A relief!” he exclaimed suddenly.
Everyone looked at him.
“Relief ,” Langdon said, “is the other half of sculpture!” Sculpture is the art of shaping figures
in the round and also in relief . He had written the definition on chalkboards for years. Reliefs were
essentially two-dimensional sculptures, like Abraham Lincoln’s profile on the penny. Bernini’s
Chigi Chapel medallions were another perfect example.
“Bassorelievo?” the guard asked, using the Italian art term.
“Yes! Bas-relief!” Langdon rapped his knuckles on the hood. “I wasn’t thinking in those
terms! That tile you’re talking about in St. Peter’s Square is called the West Ponente –the West
Wind. It’s also known as Respiro di Dio .”
“Breath of God?”
“Yes! Air! And it was carved and put there by the original architect!”
Vittoria looked confused. “But I thought Michelangelo designed St. Peter’s.”
“Yes, the basilica !” Langdon exclaimed, triumph in his voice. “But St. Peter’s Square was
designed by Bernini!”
As the caravan of Alpha Romeos tore out of Piazza del Popolo, everyone was in too much of
a hurry to notice the BBC van pulling out behind them.
73
Gunther Glick floored the BBC van’s accelerator and swerved through traffic as he tailed the
four speeding Alpha Romeos across the Tiber River on Ponte Margherita. Normally Glick would
have made an effort to maintain an inconspicuous distance, but today he could barely keep up.
These guys were flying.
Macri sat in her work area in the back of the van finishing a phone call with London. She
hung up and yelled to Glick over the sound of the traffic. “You want the good news or bad news?”
Glick frowned. Nothing was ever simple when dealing with the home office. “Bad news.”
“Editorial is burned we abandoned our post.”
“Surprise.”
“They also think your tipster is a fraud.”
“Of course.”
“And the boss just warned me that you’re a few crumpets short of a proper tea.”
Glick scowled. “Great. And the good news?”
“They agreed to look at the footage we just shot.”
Glick felt his scowl soften into a grin. I guess we’ll see who’s short a few crumpets . “So fire
it off.”
“Can’t transmit until we stop and get a fixed cell read.”
Glick gunned the van onto Via Cola di Rienzo. “Can’t stop now.” He tailed the Alpha
Romeos through a hard left swerve around Piazza Risorgimento.
Macri held on to her computer gear in back as everything slid. “Break my transmitter,” she
warned, “and we’ll have to walk this footage to London.”
“Sit tight, love. Something tells me we’re almost there.”
Macri looked up. “Where?”
Glick gazed out at the familiar dome now looming directly in front of them. He smiled.
“Right back where we started.”
The four Alpha Romeos slipped deftly into traffic surrounding St. Peter’s Square. They split
up and spread out along the piazza perimeter, quietly unloading men at select points. The debarking
guards moved into the throng of tourists and media vans on the edge of the square and instantly
became invisible. Some of the guards entered the forest of pillars encompassing the colonnade.
They too seemed to evaporate into the surroundings. As Langdon watched through the windshield,
he sensed a noose tightening around St. Peter’s.
In addition to the men Olivetti had just dispatched, the commander had radioed ahead to the
Vatican and sent additional undercover guards to the center where Bernini’s West Ponente was
located. As Langdon looked out at the wide-open spaces of St. Peter’s Square, a familiar question
nagged. How does the Illuminati assassin plan to get away with this? How will he get a cardinal
through all these people and kill him in plain view? Langdon checked his Mickey Mouse watch. It
was 8:54 P.M. Six minutes.
In the front seat, Olivetti turned and faced Langdon and Vittoria. “I want you two right on top
of this Bernini brick or block or whatever the hell it is. Same drill. You’re tourists. Use the phone if
you see anything.”
Before Langdon could respond, Vittoria had his hand and was pulling him out of the car.
The springtime sun was setting behind St. Peter’s Basilica, and a massive shadow spread,
engulfing the piazza. Langdon felt an ominous chill as he and Vittoria moved into the cool, black
umbra. Snaking through the crowd, Langdon found himself searching every face they passed,
wondering if the killer was among them. Vittoria’s hand felt warm.
As they crossed the open expanse of St. Peter’s Square, Langdon sensed Bernini’s sprawling
piazza having the exact effect the artist had been commissioned to create–that of “humbling all
those who entered.” Langdon certainly felt humbled at the moment. Humbled and hungry , he
realized, surprised such a mundane thought could enter his head at a moment like this.
“To the obelisk?” Vittoria asked.
Langdon nodded, arching left across the piazza.
“Time?” Vittoria asked, walking briskly, but casually.
“Five of.”
Vittoria said nothing, but Langdon felt her grip tighten. He was still carrying the gun. He
hoped Vittoria would not decide she needed it. He could not imagine her whipping out a weapon in
St. Peter’s Square and blowing away the kneecaps of some killer while the global media looked on.
Then again, an incident like that would be nothing compared to the branding and murder of a
cardinal out here.
Air , Langdon thought. The second element of science . He tried to picture the brand. The
method of murder. Again he scanned the sprawling expanse of granite beneath his feet–St. Peter’s
Square–an open desert surrounded by Swiss Guard. If the Hassassin really dared attempt this,
Langdon could not imagine how he would escape.
In the center of the piazza rose Caligula’s 350-ton Egyptian obelisk. It stretched eighty-one
feet skyward to the pyramidal apex onto which was affixed a hollow iron cross. Sufficiently high to
catch the last of the evening sun, the cross shone as if magic… purportedly containing relics of the
cross on which Christ was crucified.
Two fountains flanked the obelisk in perfect symmetry. Art historians knew the fountains
marked the exact geometric focal points of Bernini’s elliptical piazza, but it was an architectural
oddity Langdon had never really considered until today. It seemed Rome was suddenly filled with
ellipses, pyramids, and startling geometry.
As they neared the obelisk, Vittoria slowed. She exhaled heavily, as if coaxing Langdon to
relax along with her. Langdon made the effort, lowering his shoulders and loosening his clenched
jaw.
Somewhere around the obelisk, boldly positioned outside the largest church in the world, was
the second altar of science–Bernini’s West Ponente –an elliptical block in St. Peter’s Square.
Gunther Glick watched from the shadows of the pillars surrounding St. Peter’s Square. On
any other day the man in the tweed jacket and the woman in khaki shorts would not have interested
him in the least. They appeared to be nothing but tourists enjoying the square. But today was not
any other day. Today had been a day of phone tips, corpses, unmarked cars racing through Rome,
and men in tweed jackets climbing scaffolding in search of God only knew what. Glick would stay
with them.
He looked out across the square and saw Macri. She was exactly where he had told her to go,
on the far side of the couple, hovering on their flank. Macri carried her video camera casually, but
despite her imitation of a bored member of the press, she stood out more than Glick would have
liked. No other reporters were in this far corner of the square, and the acronym “BBC” stenciled on
her camera was drawing some looks from tourists.
The tape Macri had shot earlier of the naked body dumped in the trunk was playing at this
very moment on the VCR transmitter back in the van. Glick knew the images were sailing over his
head right now en route to London. He wondered what editorial would say.
He wished he and Macri had reached the body sooner, before the army of plainclothed
soldiers had intervened. The same army, he knew, had now fanned out and surrounded this piazza.
Something big was about to happen.
The media is the right arm of anarchy , the killer had said. Glick wondered if he had missed
his chance for a big scoop. He looked out at the other media vans in the distance and watched Macri
tailing the mysterious couple across the piazza. Something told Glick he was still in the game…
74
Langdon saw what he was looking for a good ten yards before they reached it. Through the
scattered tourists, the white marble ellipse of Bernini’s West Ponente stood out against the gray
granite cubes that made up the rest of the piazza. Vittoria apparently saw it too. Her hand tensed.
“Relax,” Langdon whispered. “Do your piranha thing.”
Vittoria loosened her grip.
As they drew nearer, everything seemed forbiddingly normal. Tourists wandered, nuns
chatted along the perimeter of the piazza, a girl fed pigeons at the base of the obelisk.
Langdon refrained from checking his watch. He knew it was almost time.
The elliptical stone arrived beneath their feet, and Langdon and Vittoria slowed to a stop–not
overeagerly–just two tourists pausing dutifully at a point of mild interest.
“West Ponente ,” Vittoria said, reading the inscription on the stone.
Langdon gazed down at the marble relief and felt suddenly naive. Not in his art books, not in
his numerous trips to Rome, not ever had West Ponente ’s significance jumped out at him.
Not until now.
The relief was elliptical, about three feet long, and carved with a rudimentary face–a depiction
of the West Wind as an angel-like countenance. Gusting from the angel’s mouth, Bernini had drawn
a powerful breath of air blowing outward away from the Vatican… the breath of God . This was
Bernini’s tribute to the second element… Air… an ethereal zephyr blown from angel’s lips. As
Langdon stared, he realized the significance of the relief went deeper still. Bernini had carved the
air in five distinct gusts… five! What was more, flanking the medallion were two shining stars.
Langdon thought of Galileo. Two stars, five gusts, ellipses, symmetry … He felt hollow. His head
hurt.
Vittoria began walking again almost immediately, leading Langdon away from the relief. “I
think someone’s following us,” she said.
Langdon looked up. “Where?”
Vittoria moved a good thirty yards before speaking. She pointed up at the Vatican as if
showing Langdon something on the dome. “The same person has been behind us all the way across
the square.” Casually, Vittoria glanced over her shoulder. “Still on us. Keep moving.”
“You think it’s the Hassassin?”
Vittoria shook her head. “Not unless the Illuminati hires women with BBC cameras.”
When the bells of St. Peter’s began their deafening clamor, both Langdon and Vittoria
jumped. It was time. They had circled away from West Ponente in an attempt to lose the reporter
but were now moving back toward the relief.
Despite the clanging bells, the area seemed perfectly calm. Tourists wandered. A homeless
drunk dozed awkwardly at the base of the obelisk. A little girl fed pigeons. Langdon wondered if
the reporter had scared the killer off. Doubtful , he decided, recalling the killer’s promise. I will
make your cardinals media luminaries .
As the echo of the ninth bell faded away, a peaceful silence descended across the square.
Then… the little girl began to scream.
75
Langdon was the first to reach the screaming girl.
The terrified youngster stood frozen, pointing at the base of the obelisk where a shabby,
decrepit drunk sat slumped on the stairs. The man was a miserable sight… apparently one of
Rome’s homeless. His gray hair hung in greasy strands in front of his face, and his entire body was
wrapped in some sort of dirty cloth. The girl kept screaming as she scampered off into the crowd.
Langdon felt an upsurge of dread as he dashed toward the invalid. There was a dark, widening
stain spreading across the man’s rags. Fresh, flowing blood.
Then, it was as if everything happened at once.
The old man seemed to crumple in the middle, tottering forward. Langdon lunged, but he was
too late. The man pitched forward, toppled off the stairs, and hit the pavement facedown.
Motionless.
Langdon dropped to his knees. Vittoria arrived beside him. A crowd was gathering.
Vittoria put her fingers on the man’s throat from behind. “There’s a pulse,” she declared.
“Roll him.”
Langdon was already in motion. Grasping the man’s shoulders, he rolled the body. As he did,
the loose rags seemed to slough away like dead flesh. The man flopped limp onto his back. Dead
center of his naked chest was a wide area of charred flesh.
Vittoria gasped and pulled back.
Langdon felt paralyzed, pinned somewhere between nausea and awe. The symbol had a
terrifying simplicity to it.
“Air,” Vittoria choked. “It’s… him.”
Swiss Guards appeared from out of nowhere, shouting orders, racing after an unseen assassin.
Nearby, a tourist explained that only minutes ago, a dark-skinned man had been kind enough
to help this poor, wheezing, homeless man across the square… even sitting a moment on the stairs
with the invalid before disappearing back into the crowd.
Vittoria ripped the rest of the rags off the man’s abdomen. He had two deep puncture wounds,
one on either side of the brand, just below his rib cage. She cocked the man’s head back and began
to administer mouth to mouth. Langdon was not prepared for what happened next. As Vittoria blew,
the wounds on either side of the man’s midsection hissed and sprayed blood into the air like
blowholes on a whale. The salty liquid hit Langdon in the face.
Vittoria stopped short, looking horrified. “His lungs…” she stammered. “They’re…
punctured.”
Langdon wiped his eyes as he looked down at the two perforations. The holes gurgled. The
cardinal’s lungs were destroyed. He was gone.
Vittoria covered the body as the Swiss Guards moved in.
Langdon stood, disoriented. As he did, he saw her. The woman who had been following them
earlier was crouched nearby. Her BBC video camera was shouldered, aimed, and running. She and
Langdon locked eyes, and he knew she’d gotten it all. Then, like a cat, she bolted.
76
Chinita Macri was on the run. She had the story of her life.
Her video camera felt like an anchor as she lumbered across St. Peter’s Square, pushing
through the gathering crowd. Everyone seemed to be moving in the opposite direction than her…
toward the commotion. Macri was trying to get as far away as possible. The man in the tweed
jacket had seen her, and now she sensed others were after her, men she could not see, closing in
from all sides.
Macri was still aghast from the images she had just recorded. She wondered if the dead man
was really who she feared he was. Glick’s mysterious phone contact suddenly seemed a little less
crazy.
As she hurried in the direction of the BBC van, a young man with a decidedly militaristic air
emerged from the crowd before her. Their eyes met, and they both stopped. Like lightning, he
raised a walkie-talkie and spoke into it. Then he moved toward her. Macri wheeled and doubled
back into the crowd, her heart pounding.
As she stumbled through the mass of arms and legs, she removed the spent video cassette
from her camera. Cellulose gold , she thought, tucking the tape under her belt flush to her backside
and letting her coat tails cover it. For once she was glad she carried some extra weight. Glick, where
the hell are you!
Another soldier appeared to her left, closing in. Macri knew she had little time. She banked
into the crowd again. Yanking a blank cartridge from her case, she slapped it into the camera. Then
she prayed.
She was thirty yards from the BBC van when the two men materialized directly in front of
her, arms folded. She was going nowhere.
“Film,” one snapped. “Now.”
Macri recoiled, wrapping her arms protectively around her camera. “No chance.”
One of the men pulled aside his jacket, revealing a sidearm.
“So shoot me,” Macri said, amazed by the boldness of her voice.
“Film,” the first one repeated.
Where the devil is Glick? Macri stamped her foot and yelled as loudly as possible, “I am a
professional videographer with the BBC! By Article 12 of the Free Press Act, this film is property
of the British Broadcast Corporation!”
The men did not flinch. The one with the gun took a step toward her. “I am a lieutenant with
the Swiss Guard, and by the Holy Doctrine governing the property on which you are now standing,
you are subject to search and seizure.”
A crowd had started to gather now around them.
Macri yelled, “I will not under any circumstances give you the film in this camera without
speaking to my editor in London. I suggest you–”
The guards ended it. One yanked the camera out of her hands. The other forcibly grabbed her
by the arm and twisted her in the direction of the Vatican. “Grazie ,” he said, leading her through a
jostling crowd.
Macri prayed they would not search her and find the tape. If she could somehow protect the
film long enough to–
Suddenly, the unthinkable happened. Someone in the crowd was groping under her coat.
Macri felt the video yanked away from her. She wheeled, but swallowed her words. Behind her, a
breathless Gunther Glick gave her a wink and dissolved back into the crowd.
77
Robert Langdon staggered into the private bathroom adjoining the Office of the Pope. He
dabbed the blood from his face and lips. The blood was not his own. It was that of Cardinal
Lamassé, who had just died horribly in the crowded square outside the Vatican. Virgin sacrifices on
the altars of science . So far, the Hassassin had made good on his threat.
Langdon felt powerless as he gazed into the mirror. His eyes were drawn, and stubble had
begun to darken his cheeks. The room around him was immaculate and lavish–black marble with
gold fixtures, cotton towels, and scented hand soaps.
Langdon tried to rid his mind of the bloody brand he had just seen. Air. The image stuck. He
had witnessed three ambigrams since waking up this morning… and he knew there were two more
coming.
Outside the door, it sounded as if Olivetti, the camerlegno, and Captain Rocher were debating
what to do next. Apparently, the antimatter search had turned up nothing so far. Either the guards
had missed the canister, or the intruder had gotten deeper inside the Vatican than Commander
Olivetti had been willing to entertain.
Langdon dried his hands and face. Then he turned and looked for a urinal. No urinal. Just a
bowl. He lifted the lid.
As he stood there, tension ebbing from his body, a giddy wave of exhaustion shuddered
through his core. The emotions knotting his chest were so many, so incongruous. He was fatigued,
running on no food or sleep, walking the Path of Illumination, traumatized by two brutal murders.
Langdon felt a deepening horror over the possible outcome of this drama.
Think , he told himself. His mind was blank.
As he flushed, an unexpected realization hit him. This is the Pope’s toilet , he thought. I just
took a leak in the Pope’s toilet . He had to chuckle. The Holy Throne .
78
In London, a BBC technician ejected a video cassette from a satellite receiver unit and dashed
across the control room floor. She burst into the office of the editor-in-chief, slammed the video into
his VCR, and pressed play.
As the tape rolled, she told him about the conversation she had just had with Gunther Glick in
Vatican City. In addition, BBC photo archives had just given her a positive ID on the victim in St.
Peter’s Square.
When the editor-in-chief emerged from his office, he was ringing a cowbell. Everything in
editorial stopped.
“Live in five!” the man boomed. “On-air talent to prep! Media coordinators, I want your
contacts on line! We’ve got a story we’re selling! And we’ve got film!”
The market coordinators grabbed their Rolodexes.
“Film specs!” one of them yelled.
“Thirty-second trim,” the chief replied.
“Content?”
“Live homicide.”
The coordinators looked encouraged. “Usage and licensing price?”
“A million U.S. per.”
Heads shot up. “What!”
“You heard me! I want top of the food chain. CNN, MSNBC, then the big three! Offer a
dial-in preview. Give them five minutes to piggyback before BBC runs it.”
“What the hell happened?” someone demanded. “The prime minister get skinned alive?”
The chief shook his head. “Better.”
At that exact instant, somewhere in Rome, the Hassassin enjoyed a fleeting moment of repose
in a comfortable chair. He admired the legendary chamber around him. I am sitting in the Church of
Illumination , he thought. The Illuminati lair . He could not believe it was still here after all of these
centuries.
Dutifully, he dialed the BBC reporter to whom he had spoken earlier. It was time. The world
had yet to hear the most shocking news of all.
79
Vittoria Vetra sipped a glass of water and nibbled absently at some tea scones just set out by
one of the Swiss Guards. She knew she should eat, but she had no appetite. The Office of the Pope
was bustling now, echoing with tense conversations. Captain Rocher, Commander Olivetti, and half
a dozen guards assessed the damage and debated the next move.
Robert Langdon stood nearby staring out at St. Peter’s Square. He looked dejected. Vittoria
walked over. “Ideas?”
He shook his head.
“Scone?”
His mood seemed to brighten at the sight of food. “Hell yes. Thanks.” He ate voraciously.
The conversation behind them went quiet suddenly when two Swiss Guards escorted
Camerlegno Ventresca through the door. If the chamberlain had looked drained before, Vittoria
thought, now he looked empty.
“What happened?” the camerlegno said to Olivetti. From the look on the camerlegno’s face,
he appeared to have already been told the worst of it.
Olivetti’s official update sounded like a battlefield casualty report. He gave the facts with flat
efficacy. “Cardinal Ebner was found dead in the church of Santa Maria del Popolo just after eight
o’clock. He had been suffocated and branded with the ambigrammatic word ‘Earth.’ Cardinal
Lamassé was murdered in St. Peter’s Square ten minutes ago. He died of perforations to the chest.
He was branded with the word ‘Air,’ also ambigrammatic. The killer escaped in both instances.”
The camerlegno crossed the room and sat heavily behind the Pope’s desk. He bowed his head.
“Cardinals Guidera and Baggia, however, are still alive.”
The camerlegno’s head shot up, his expression pained. “This is our consolation? Two
cardinals have been murdered, commander. And the other two will obviously not be alive much
longer unless you find them.”
“We will find them,” Olivetti assured. “I am encouraged.”
“Encouraged? We’ve had nothing but failure.”
“Untrue. We’ve lost two battles, signore, but we’re winning the war. The Illuminati had
intended to turn this evening into a media circus. So far we have thwarted their plan. Both
cardinals’ bodies have been recovered without incident. In addition,” Olivetti continued, “Captain
Rocher tells me he is making excellent headway on the antimatter search.”
Captain Rocher stepped forward in his red beret. Vittoria thought he looked more human
somehow than the other guards–stern but not so rigid. Rocher’s voice was emotional and
crystalline, like a violin. “I am hopeful we will have the canister for you within an hour, signore.”
“Captain,” the camerlegno said, “excuse me if I seem less than hopeful, but I was under the
impression that a search of Vatican City would take far more time than we have.”
“A full search, yes. However, after assessing the situation, I am confident the antimatter
canister is located in one of our white zones–those Vatican sectors accessible to public tours–the
museums and St. Peter’s Basilica, for example. We have already killed power in those zones and
are conducting our scan.”
“You intend to search only a small percentage of Vatican City?”
“Yes, signore. It is highly unlikely that an intruder gained access to the inner zones of Vatican
City. The fact that the missing security camera was stolen from a public access area–a stairwell in
one of the museums–clearly implies that the intruder had limited access. Therefore he would only
have been able to relocate the camera and antimatter in another public access area. It is these areas
on which we are focusing our search.”
“But the intruder kidnapped four cardinals. That certainly implies deeper infiltration than we
thought.”
“Not necessarily. We must remember that the cardinals spent much of today in the Vatican
museums and St. Peter’s Basilica, enjoying those areas without the crowds. It is probable that the
missing cardinals were taken in one of these areas.”
“But how were they removed from our walls?”
“We are still assessing that.”
“I see.” The camerlegno exhaled and stood up. He walked over to Olivetti. “Commander, I
would like to hear your contingency plan for evacuation.”
“We are still formalizing that, signore. In the meantime, I am faithful Captain Rocher will
find the canister.”
Rocher clicked his boots as if in appreciation of the vote of confidence. “My men have
already scanned two-thirds of the white zones. Confidence is high.”
The camerlegno did not appear to share that confidence.
At that moment the guard with a scar beneath one eye came through the door carrying a
clipboard and a map. He strode toward Langdon. “Mr. Langdon? I have the information you
requested on the West Ponente .”
Langdon swallowed his scone. “Good. Let’s have a look.”
The others kept talking while Vittoria joined Robert and the guard as they spread out the map
on the Pope’s desk.
The soldier pointed to St. Peter’s Square. “This is where we are. The central line of West
Ponente ’s breath points due east, directly away from Vatican City.” The guard traced a line with
his finger from St. Peter’s Square across the Tiber River and up into the heart of old Rome. “As you
can see, the line passes through almost all of Rome. There are about twenty Catholic churches that
fall near this line.”
Langdon slumped. “Twenty? ”
“Maybe more.”
“Do any of the churches fall directly on the line?”
“Some look closer than others,” the guard said, “but translating the exact bearing of the West
Ponente onto a map leaves margin for error.”
Langdon looked out at St. Peter’s Square a moment. Then he scowled, stroking his chin.
“How about fire ? Any of them have Bernini artwork that has to do with fire?”
Silence.
“How about obelisks?” he demanded. “Are any of the churches located near obelisks?”
The guard began checking the map.
Vittoria saw a glimmer of hope in Langdon’s eyes and realized what he was thinking. He’s
right! The first two markers had been located on or near piazzas that contained obelisks! Maybe
obelisks were a theme? Soaring pyramids marking the Illuminati path? The more Vittoria thought
about it, the more perfect it seemed… four towering beacons rising over Rome to mark the altars of
science.
“It’s a long shot,” Langdon said, “but I know that many of Rome’s obelisks were erected or
moved during Bernini’s reign. He was no doubt involved in their placement.”
“Or,” Vittoria added, “Bernini could have placed his markers near existing obelisks.”
Langdon nodded. “True.”
“Bad news,” the guard said. “No obelisks on the line.” He traced his finger across the map.
“None even remotely close. Nothing.”
Langdon sighed.
Vittoria’s shoulders slumped. She’d thought it was a promising idea. Apparently, this was not
going to be as easy as they’d hoped. She tried to stay positive. “Robert, think. You must know of a
Bernini statue relating to fire . Anything at all.”
“Believe me, I’ve been thinking. Bernini was incredibly prolific. Hundreds of works. I was
hoping West Ponente would point to a single church. Something that would ring a bell.”
“Fuòco ,” she pressed. “Fire . No Bernini titles jump out?”
Langdon shrugged. “There’s his famous sketches of Fireworks , but they’re not sculpture, and
they’re in Leipzig, Germany.”
Vittoria frowned. “And you’re sure the breath is what indicates the direction?”
“You saw the relief, Vittoria. The design was totally symmetrical. The only indication of
bearing was the breath.”
Vittoria knew he was right.
“Not to mention,” he added, “because the West Ponente signifies Air , following the breath
seems symbolically appropriate.”
Vittoria nodded. So we follow the breath. But where?
Olivetti came over. “What have you got?”
“Too many churches,” the soldier said. “Two dozen or so. I suppose we could put four men
on each church–”
“Forget it,” Olivetti said. “We missed this guy twice when we knew exactly where he was
going to be. A mass stakeout means leaving Vatican City unprotected and canceling the search.”
“We need a reference book,” Vittoria said. “An index of Bernini’s work. If we can scan titles,
maybe something will jump out.”
“I don’t know,” Langdon said. “If it’s a work Bernini created specifically for the Illuminati, it
may be very obscure. It probably won’t be listed in a book.”
Vittoria refused to believe it. “The other two sculptures were fairly well-known. You’d heard
of them both.”
Langdon shrugged. “Yeah.”
“If we scan titles for references to the word ‘fire,’ maybe we’ll find a statue that’s listed as
being in the right direction.”
Langdon seemed convinced it was worth a shot. He turned to Olivetti. “I need a list of all
Bernini’s work. You guys probably don’t have a coffee-table Bernini book around here, do you?”
“Coffee-table book?” Olivetti seemed unfamiliar with the term.
“Never mind. Any list. How about the Vatican Museum? They must have Bernini references.”
The guard with the scar frowned. “Power in the museum is out, and the records room is
enormous. Without the staff there to help–”
“The Bernini work in question,” Olivetti interrupted. “Would it have been created while
Bernini was employed here at the Vatican?”
“Almost definitely,” Langdon said. “He was here almost his entire career. And certainly
during the time period of the Galileo conflict.”
Olivetti nodded. “Then there’s another reference.”
Vittoria felt a flicker of optimism. “Where?”
The commander did not reply. He took his guard aside and spoke in hushed tones. The guard
seemed uncertain but nodded obediently. When Olivetti was finished talking, the guard turned to
Langdon.
“This way please, Mr. Langdon. It’s nine-fifteen. We’ll have to hurry.”
Langdon and the guard headed for the door.
Vittoria started after them. “I’ll help.”
Olivetti caught her by the arm. “No, Ms. Vetra. I need a word with you.” His grasp was
authoritative.
Langdon and the guard left. Olivetti’s face was wooden as he took Vittoria aside. But
whatever it was Olivetti had intended to say to her, he never got the chance. His walkie-talkie
crackled loudly. “Commandante? ”
Everyone in the room turned.
The voice on the transmitter was grim. “I think you better turn on the television.”
80
When Langdon had left the Vatican Secret Archives only two hours ago, he had never
imagined he would see them again. Now, winded from having jogged the entire way with his Swiss
Guard escort, Langdon found himself back at the archives once again.
His escort, the guard with the scar, now led Langdon through the rows of translucent cubicles.
The silence of the archives felt somehow more forbidding now, and Langdon was thankful when the
guard broke it.
“Over here, I think,” he said, escorting Langdon to the back of the chamber where a series of
smaller vaults lined the wall. The guard scanned the titles on the vaults and motioned to one of
them. “Yes, here it is. Right where the commander said it would be.”
Langdon read the title. Attivi Vaticani . Vatican assets? He scanned the list of contents. Real
estate… currency… Vatican Bank… antiquities… The list went on.
“Paperwork of all Vatican assets,” the guard said.
Langdon looked at the cubicle. Jesus . Even in the dark, he could tell it was packed.
“My commander said that whatever Bernini created while under Vatican patronage would be
listed here as an asset.”
Langdon nodded, realizing the commander’s instincts just might pay off. In Bernini’s day,
everything an artist created while under the patronage of the Pope became, by law, property of the
Vatican. It was more like feudalism than patronage, but top artists lived well and seldom
complained. “Including works placed in churches outside Vatican City?”
The soldier gave him an odd look. “Of course. All Catholic churches in Rome are property of
the Vatican.”
Langdon looked at the list in his hand. It contained the names of the twenty or so churches
that were located on a direct line with West Ponente ’s breath. The third altar of science was one of
them, and Langdon hoped he had time to figure out which it was. Under other circumstances, he
would gladly have explored each church in person. Today, however, he had about twenty minutes to
find what he was looking for–the one church containing a Bernini tribute to fire .
Langdon walked to the vault’s electronic revolving door. The guard did not follow. Langdon
sensed an uncertain hesitation. He smiled. “The air’s fine. Thin, but breathable.”
“My orders are to escort you here and then return immediately to the security center.”
“You’re leaving ?”
“Yes. The Swiss Guard are not allowed inside the archives. I am breaching protocol by
escorting you this far. The commander reminded me of that.”
“Breaching protocol?” Do you have any idea what is going on here tonight? “Whose side is
your damn commander on!”
All friendliness disappeared from the guard’s face. The scar under his eye twitched. The
guard stared, looking suddenly a lot like Olivetti himself.
“I apologize,” Langdon said, regretting the comment. “It’s just… I could use some help.”
The guard did not blink. “I am trained to follow orders. Not debate them. When you find what
you are looking for, contact the commander immediately.”
Langdon was flustered. “But where will he be?”
The guard removed his walkie-talkie and set it on a nearby table. “Channel one.” Then he
disappeared into the dark.
81
The television in the Office of the Pope was an oversized Hitachi hidden in a recessed cabinet
opposite his desk. The doors to the cabinet were now open, and everyone gathered around. Vittoria
moved in close. As the screen warmed up, a young female reporter came into view. She was a
doe-eyed brunette.
“For MSNBC news,” she announced, “this is Kelly Horan-Jones, live from Vatican City.”
The image behind her was a night shot of St. Peter’s Basilica with all its lights blazing.
“You’re not live ,” Rocher snapped. “That’s stock footage! The lights in the basilica are out .”
Olivetti silenced him with a hiss.
The reporter continued, sounding tense. “Shocking developments in the Vatican elections this
evening. We have reports that two members of the College of Cardinals have been brutally
murdered in Rome.”
Olivetti swore under his breath.
As the reporter continued, a guard appeared at the door, breathless. “Commander, the central
switchboard reports every line lit. They’re requesting our official position on–”
“Disconnect it,” Olivetti said, never taking his eyes from the TV.
The guard looked uncertain. “But, commander–”
“Go!”
The guard ran off.
Vittoria sensed the camerlegno had wanted to say something but had stopped himself. Instead,
the man stared long and hard at Olivetti before turning back to the television.
MSNBC was now running tape. The Swiss Guards carried the body of Cardinal Ebner down
the stairs outside Santa Maria del Popolo and lifted him into an Alpha Romeo. The tape froze and
zoomed in as the cardinal’s naked body became visible just before they deposited him in the trunk
of the car.
“Who the hell shot this footage?” Olivetti demanded.
The MSNBC reporter kept talking. “This is believed to be the body of Cardinal Ebner of
Frankfurt, Germany. The men removing his body from the church are believed to be Vatican Swiss
Guard.” The reporter looked like she was making every effort to appear appropriately moved. They
closed in on her face, and she became even more somber. “At this time, MSNBC would like to
issue our viewers a discretionary warning. The images we are about to show are exceptionally vivid
and may not be suitable for all audiences.”
Vittoria grunted at the station’s feigned concern for viewer sensibility, recognizing the
warning as exactly what it was–the ultimate media “teaser line.” Nobody ever changed channels
after a promise like that.
The reporter drove it home. “Again, this footage may be shocking to some viewers.”
“What footage?” Olivetti demanded. “You just showed–”
The shot that filled the screen was of a couple in St. Peter’s Square, moving through the
crowd. Vittoria instantly recognized the two people as Robert and herself. In the corner of the
screen was a text overlay: Courtesy of the BBC . A bell was tolling.
“Oh, no,” Vittoria said aloud. “Oh… no.”
The camerlegno looked confused. He turned to Olivetti. “I thought you said you confiscated
this tape!”
Suddenly, on television, a child was screaming. The image panned to find a little girl pointing
at what appeared to be a bloody homeless man. Robert Langdon entered abruptly into the frame,
trying to help the little girl. The shot tightened.
Everyone in the Pope’s office stared in horrified silence as the drama unfolded before them.
The cardinal’s body fell face first onto the pavement. Vittoria appeared and called orders. There
was blood. A brand. A ghastly, failed attempt to administer CPR.
“This astonishing footage,” the reporter was saying, “was shot only minutes ago outside the
Vatican. Our sources tell us this is the body of Cardinal Lamassé from France. How he came to be
dressed this way and why he was not in conclave remain a mystery. So far, the Vatican has refused
to comment.” The tape began to roll again.
“Refused comment?” Rocher said. “Give us a damn minute!”
The reporter was still talking, her eyebrows furrowing with intensity. “Although MSNBC has
yet to confirm a motive for the attack, our sources tell us that responsibility for the murders has
been claimed by a group calling themselves the Illuminati.”
Olivetti exploded. “What! ”
“… find out more about the Illuminati by visiting our website at–”
“Non é posibile!” Olivetti declared. He switched channels.
This station had a Hispanic male reporter. “–a satanic cult known as the Illuminati, who some
historians believe–”
Olivetti began pressing the remote wildly. Every channel was in the middle of a live update.
Most were in English.
“–Swiss Guards removing a body from a church earlier this evening. The body is
believed to be that of Cardinal–”
“–lights in the basilica and museums are extinguished leaving speculation–”
“–will be speaking with conspiracy theorist Tyler Tingley, about this shocking
resurgence–”
“–rumors of two more assassinations planned for later this evening–”
“–questioning now whether papal hopeful Cardinal Baggia is among the missing–”
Vittoria turned away. Everything was happening so fast. Outside the window, in the settling
dark, the raw magnetism of human tragedy seemed to be sucking people toward Vatican City. The
crowd in the square thickened almost by the instant. Pedestrians streamed toward them while a new
batch of media personnel unloaded vans and staked their claim in St. Peter’s Square.
Olivetti set down the remote control and turned to the camerlegno. “Signore, I cannot imagine
how this could happen. We took the tape that was in that camera!”
The camerlegno looked momentarily too stunned to speak.
Nobody said a word. The Swiss Guards stood rigid at attention.
“It appears,” the camerlegno said finally, sounding too devastated to be angry, “that we have
not contained this crisis as well as I was led to believe.” He looked out the window at the gathering
masses. “I need to make an address.”
Olivetti shook his head. “No, signore. That is exactly what the Illuminati want you to
do–confirm them, empower them. We must remain silent.”
“And these people?” The camerlegno pointed out the window. “There will be tens of
thousands shortly. Then hundreds of thousands. Continuing this charade only puts them in danger. I
need to warn them. Then we need to evacuate our College of Cardinals.”
“There is still time. Let Captain Rocher find the antimatter.”
The camerlegno turned. “Are you attempting to give me an order?”
“No, I am giving you advice. If you are concerned about the people outside, we can announce
a gas leak and clear the area, but admitting we are hostage is dangerous.”
“Commander, I will only say this once. I will not use this office as a pulpit to lie to the world.
If I announce anything at all, it will be the truth.”
“The truth? That Vatican City is threatened to be destroyed by satanic terrorists? It only
weakens our position.”
The camerlegno glared. “How much weaker could our position be?”
Rocher shouted suddenly, grabbing the remote and increasing the volume on the television.
Everyone turned.
On air, the woman from MSNBC now looked genuinely unnerved. Superimposed beside her
was a photo of the late Pope. “… breaking information. This just in from the BBC…” She glanced
off camera as if to confirm she was really supposed to make this announcement. Apparently getting
confirmation, she turned and grimly faced the viewers. “The Illuminati have just claimed
responsibility for…” She hesitated. “They have claimed responsibility for the death of the Pope
fifteen days ago.”
The camerlegno’s jaw fell.
Rocher dropped the remote control.
Vittoria could barely process the information.
“By Vatican law,” the woman continued, “no formal autopsy is ever performed on a Pope, so
the Illuminati claim of murder cannot be confirmed. Nonetheless, the Illuminati hold that the cause
of the late Pope’s death was not a stroke as the Vatican reported, but poisoning .”
The room went totally silent again.
Olivetti erupted. “Madness! A bold-faced lie!”
Rocher began flipping channels again. The bulletin seemed to spread like a plague from
station to station. Everyone had the same story. Headlines competed for optimal sensationalism.
Murder at the Vatican
Pope Poisoned
Satan Touches House of God
The camerlegno looked away. “God help us.”
As Rocher flipped, he passed a BBC station. “–tipped me off about the killing at Santa Maria
de Popolo–”
“Wait!” the camerlegno said. “Back.”
Rocher went back. On screen, a prim-looking man sat at a BBC news desk. Superimposed
over his shoulder was a still snapshot of an odd-looking man with a red beard. Underneath his
photo, it said:
Gunther Glick–Live in Vatican City
Reporter Glick was apparently reporting by phone, the connection scratchy. “… my
videographer got the footage of the cardinal being removed from the Chigi Chapel.”
“Let me reiterate for our viewers,” the anchorman in London was saying, “BBC reporter
Gunther Glick is the man who first broke this story. He has been in phone contact twice now with
the alleged Illuminati assassin. Gunther, you say the assassin phoned only moments ago to pass
along a message from the Illuminati?”
“He did.”
“And their message was that the Illuminati were somehow responsible for the Pope’s
death?” The anchorman sounded incredulous.
“Correct. The caller told me that the Pope’s death was not a stroke, as the Vatican had
thought, but rather that the Pope had been poisoned by the Illuminati.”
Everyone in the Pope’s office froze.
“Poisoned?” the anchorman demanded. “But… but how !”
“They gave no specifics,” Glick replied, “except to say that they killed him with a drug
known as…”–there was a rustling of papers on the line–“something known as Heparin.”
The camerlegno, Olivetti, and Rocher all exchanged confused looks.
“Heparin?” Rocher demanded, looking unnerved. “But isn’t that…?”
The camerlegno blanched. “The Pope’s medication.”
Vittoria was stunned. “The Pope was on Heparin?”
“He had thrombophlebitis,” the camerlegno said. “He took an injection once a day.”
Rocher looked flabbergasted. “But Heparin isn’t a poison . Why would the Illuminati claim–”
“Heparin is lethal in the wrong dosages,” Vittoria offered. “It’s a powerful anticoagulant. An
overdose would cause massive internal bleeding and brain hemorrhages.”
Olivetti eyed her suspiciously. “How would you know that?”
“Marine biologists use it on sea mammals in captivity to prevent blood clotting from
decreased activity. Animals have died from improper administration of the drug.” She paused. “A
Heparin overdose in a human would cause symptoms easily mistaken for a stroke… especially in
the absence of a proper autopsy.”
The camerlegno now looked deeply troubled.
“Signore,” Olivetti said, “this is obviously an Illuminati ploy for publicity. Someone
overdosing the Pope would be impossible. Nobody had access. And even if we take the bait and try
to refute their claim, how could we? Papal law prohibits autopsy. Even with an autopsy, we would
learn nothing. We would find traces of Heparin in his body from his daily injections.”
“True.” The camerlegno’s voice sharpened. “And yet something else troubles me. No one on
the outside knew His Holiness was taking this medication.”
There was a silence.
“If he overdosed with Heparin,” Vittoria said, “his body would show signs.”
Olivetti spun toward her. “Ms. Vetra, in case you didn’t hear me, papal autopsies are
prohibited by Vatican Law. We are not about to defile His Holiness’s body by cutting him open just
because an enemy makes a taunting claim!”
Vittoria felt shamed. “I was not implying…” She had not meant to seem disrespectful. “I
certainly was not suggesting you exhume the Pope…” She hesitated, though. Something Robert told
her in the Chigi passed like a ghost through her mind. He had mentioned that papal sarcophagi were
above ground and never cemented shut, a throwback to the days of the pharaohs when sealing and
burying a casket was believed to trap the deceased’s soul inside. Gravity had become the mortar of
choice, with coffin lids often weighing hundreds of pounds. Technically , she realized, it would be
possible to –
“What sort of signs?” the camerlegno said suddenly.
Vittoria felt her heart flutter with fear. “Overdoses can cause bleeding of the oral mucosa.”
“Oral what?”
“The victim’s gums would bleed. Post mortem, the blood congeals and turns the inside of the
mouth black.” Vittoria had once seen a photo taken at an aquarium in London where a pair of killer
whales had been mistakenly overdosed by their trainer. The whales floated lifeless in the tank, their
mouths hanging open and their tongues black as soot.
The camerlegno made no reply. He turned and stared out the window.
Rocher’s voice had lost its optimism. “Signore, if this claim about poisoning is true…”
“It’s not true,” Olivetti declared. “Access to the Pope by an outsider is utterly impossible.”
“If this claim is true,” Rocher repeated, “and our Holy Father was poisoned, then that has
profound implications for our antimatter search. The alleged assassination implies a much deeper
infiltration of Vatican City than we had imagined. Searching the white zones may be inadequate. If
we are compromised to such a deep extent, we may not find the canister in time.”
Olivetti leveled his captain with a cold stare. “Captain, I will tell you what is going to
happen.”
“No,” the camerlegno said, turning suddenly. “I will tell you what is going to happen.” He
looked directly at Olivetti. “This has gone far enough. In twenty minutes I will be making a
decision whether or not to cancel conclave and evacuate Vatican City. My decision will be final. Is
that clear?”
Olivetti did not blink. Nor did he respond.
The camerlegno spoke forcefully now, as though tapping a hidden reserve of power. “Captain
Rocher, you will complete your search of the white zones and report directly to me when you are
finished.”
Rocher nodded, throwing Olivetti an uneasy glance.
The camerlegno then singled out two guards. “I want the BBC reporter, Mr. Glick, in this
office immediately. If the Illuminati have been communicating with him, he may be able to help us.
Go.”
The two soldiers disappeared.
Now the camerlegno turned and addressed the remaining guards. “Gentlemen, I will not
permit any more loss of life this evening. By ten o’clock you will locate the remaining two cardinals
and capture the monster responsible for these murders. Do I make myself understood?”
“But, signore,” Olivetti argued, “we have no idea where–”
“Mr. Langdon is working on that. He seems capable. I have faith.”
With that, the camerlegno strode for the door, a new determination in his step. On his way
out, he pointed to three guards. “You three, come with me. Now.”
The guards followed.
In the doorway, the camerlegno stopped. He turned to Vittoria. “Ms. Vetra. You too. Please
come with me.”
Vittoria hesitated. “Where are we going?”
He headed out the door. “To see an old friend.”
82
At CERN, secretary Sylvie Baudeloque was hungry, wishing she could go home. To her
dismay, Kohler had apparently survived his trip to the infirmary; he had phoned and demanded –not
asked, demanded–that Sylvie stay late this evening. No explanation.
Over the years, Sylvie had programmed herself to ignore Kohler’s bizarre mood swings and
eccentricities–his silent treatments, his unnerving propensity to secretly film meetings with his
wheelchair’s porta-video. She secretly hoped one day he would shoot himself during his weekly
visit to CERN’s recreational pistol range, but apparently he was a pretty good shot.
Now, sitting alone at her desk, Sylvie heard her stomach growling. Kohler had not yet
returned, nor had he given her any additional work for the evening. To hell with sitting here bored
and starving , she decided. She left Kohler a note and headed for the staff dining commons to grab a
quick bite.
She never made it.
As she passed CERN’s recreational “suites de loisir ”–a long hallway of lounges with
televisions–she noticed the rooms were overflowing with employees who had apparently abandoned
dinner to watch the news. Something big was going on. Sylvie entered the first suite. It was packed
with byte-heads–wild young computer programmers. When she saw the headlines on the TV, she
gasped.
Terror at the Vatican
Sylvie listened to the report, unable to believe her ears. Some ancient brotherhood killing
cardinals? What did that prove? Their hatred? Their dominance? Their ignorance?
And yet, incredibly, the mood in this suite seemed anything but somber.
Two young techies ran by waving T-shirts that bore a picture of Bill Gates and the message:
And the Geek shall inherit the Earth!
“Illuminati!” one shouted. “I told you these guys were real!”
“Incredible! I thought it was just a game!”
“They killed the Pope, man! The Pope !”
“Jeez! I wonder how many points you get for that ?”
They ran off laughing.
Sylvie stood in stunned amazement. As a Catholic working among scientists, she occasionally
endured the antireligious whisperings, but the party these kids seemed to be having was all-out
euphoria over the church’s loss. How could they be so callous? Why the hatred?
For Sylvie, the church had always been an innocuous entity… a place of fellowship and
introspection… sometimes just a place to sing out loud without people staring at her. The church
recorded the benchmarks of her life–funerals, weddings, baptisms, holidays–and it asked for
nothing in return. Even the monetary dues were voluntary. Her children emerged from Sunday
School every week uplifted, filled with ideas about helping others and being kinder. What could
possibly be wrong with that ?
It never ceased to amaze her that so many of CERN’s so-called “brilliant minds” failed to
comprehend the importance of the church. Did they really believe quarks and mesons inspired the
average human being? Or that equations could replace someone’s need for faith in the divine?
Dazed, Sylvie moved down the hallway past the other lounges. All the TV rooms were
packed. She began wondering now about the call Kohler had gotten from the Vatican earlier.
Coincidence? Perhaps. The Vatican called CERN from time to time as a “courtesy” before issuing
scathing statements condemning CERN’s research–most recently for CERN’s breakthroughs in
nanotechnology, a field the church denounced because of its implications for genetic engineering.
CERN never cared. Invariably, within minutes after a Vatican salvo, Kohler’s phone would ring off
the hook with tech-investment companies wanting to license the new discovery. “No such thing as
bad press,” Kohler would always say.
Sylvie wondered if she should page Kohler, wherever the hell he was, and tell him to turn on
the news. Did he care? Had he heard? Of course, he’d heard. He was probably videotaping the
entire report with his freaky little camcorder, smiling for the first time in a year.
As Sylvie continued down the hall, she finally found a lounge where the mood was
subdued… almost melancholy. Here the scientists watching the report were some of CERN’s oldest
and most respected. They did not even look up as Sylvie slipped in and took a seat.
On the other side of CERN, in Leonardo Vetra’s frigid apartment, Maximilian Kohler had
finished reading the leather-bound journal he’d taken from Vetra’s bedside table. Now he was
watching the television reports. After a few minutes, he replaced Vetra’s journal, turned off the
television, and left the apartment.
Far away, in Vatican City, Cardinal Mortati carried another tray of ballots to the Sistine
Chapel chimney. He burned them, and the smoke was black.
Two ballotings. No Pope.
83
Flashlights were no match for the voluminous blackness of St. Peter’s Basilica. The void
overhead pressed down like a starless night, and Vittoria felt the emptiness spread out around her
like a desolate ocean. She stayed close as the Swiss Guards and the camerlegno pushed on. High
above, a dove cooed and fluttered away.
As if sensing her discomfort, the camerlegno dropped back and lay a hand on her shoulder. A
tangible strength transferred in the touch, as if the man were magically infusing her with the calm
she needed to do what they were about to do.
What are we about to do? she thought. This is madness!
And yet, Vittoria knew, for all its impiety and inevitable horror, the task at hand was
inescapable. The grave decisions facing the camerlegno required information… information
entombed in a sarcophagus in the Vatican Grottoes. She wondered what they would find. Did the
Illuminati murder the Pope? Did their power really reach so far? Am I really about to perform the
first papal autopsy?
Vittoria found it ironic that she felt more apprehensive in this unlit church than she would
swimming at night with barracuda. Nature was her refuge. She understood nature. But it was
matters of man and spirit that left her mystified. Killer fish gathering in the dark conjured images of
the press gathering outside. TV footage of branded bodies reminded her of her father’s corpse…
and the killer’s harsh laugh. The killer was out there somewhere. Vittoria felt the anger drowning
her fear.
As they circled past a pillar–thicker in girth than any redwood she could imagine–Vittoria saw
an orange glow up ahead. The light seemed to emanate from beneath the floor in the center of the
basilica. As they came closer, she realized what she was seeing. It was the famous sunken sanctuary
beneath the main altar–the sumptuous underground chamber that held the Vatican’s most sacred
relics. As they drew even with the gate surrounding the hollow, Vittoria gazed down at the golden
coffer surrounded by scores of glowing oil lamps.
“St. Peter’s bones?” she asked, knowing full well that they were. Everyone who came to St.
Peter’s knew what was in the golden casket.
“Actually, no,” the camerlegno said. “A common misconception. That’s not a reliquary. The
box holds palliums –woven sashes that the Pope gives to newly elected cardinals.”
“But I thought–”
“As does everyone. The guidebooks label this as St. Peter’s tomb, but his true grave is two
stories beneath us, buried in the earth. The Vatican excavated it in the forties. Nobody is allowed
down there.”
Vittoria was shocked. As they moved away from the glowing recession into the darkness
again, she thought of the stories she’d heard of pilgrims traveling thousands of miles to look at that
golden box, thinking they were in the presence of St. Peter. “Shouldn’t the Vatican tell people?”
“We all benefit from a sense of contact with divinity… even if it is only imagined.”
Vittoria, as a scientist, could not argue the logic. She had read countless studies of the placebo
effect–aspirins curing cancer in people who believed they were using a miracle drug. What was
faith , after all?
“Change,” the camerlegno said, “is not something we do well within Vatican City. Admitting
our past faults, modernization, are things we historically eschew. His Holiness was trying to change
that.” He paused. “Reaching to the modern world. Searching for new paths to God.”
Vittoria nodded in the dark. “Like science?”
“To be honest, science seems irrelevant.”
“Irrelevant?” Vittoria could think of a lot of words to describe science, but in the modern
world “irrelevant” did not seem like one of them.
“Science can heal, or science can kill. It depends on the soul of the man using the science. It is
the soul that interests me.”
“When did you hear your call?”
“Before I was born.”
Vittoria looked at him.
“I’m sorry, that always seems like a strange question. What I mean is that I’ve always known
I would serve God. From the moment I could first think. It wasn’t until I was a young man, though,
in the military, that I truly understood my purpose.”
Vittoria was surprised. “You were in the military?”
“Two years. I refused to fire a weapon, so they made me fly instead. Medevac helicopters. In
fact, I still fly from time to time.”
Vittoria tried to picture the young priest flying a helicopter. Oddly, she could see him
perfectly behind the controls. Camerlegno Ventresca possessed a grit that seemed to accentuate his
conviction rather than cloud it. “Did you ever fly the Pope?”
“Heavens no. We left that precious cargo to the professionals. His Holiness let me take the
helicopter to our retreat in Gandolfo sometimes.” He paused, looking at her. “Ms. Vetra, thank you
for your help here today. I am very sorry about your father. Truly.”
“Thank you.”
“I never knew my father. He died before I was born. I lost my mother when I was ten.”
Vittoria looked up. “You were orphaned?” She felt a sudden kinship.
“I survived an accident. An accident that took my mother.”
“Who took care of you?”
“God,” the camerlegno said. “He quite literally sent me another father. A bishop from
Palermo appeared at my hospital bed and took me in. At the time I was not surprised. I had sensed
God’s watchful hand over me even as a boy. The bishop’s appearance simply confirmed what I had
already suspected, that God had somehow chosen me to serve him.”
“You believed God chose you?”
“I did. And I do.” There was no trace of conceit in the camerlegno’s voice, only gratitude. “I
worked under the bishop’s tutelage for many years. He eventually became a cardinal. Still, he never
forgot me. He is the father I remember.” A beam of a flashlight caught the camerlegno’s face, and
Vittoria sensed a loneliness in his eyes.
The group arrived beneath a towering pillar, and their lights converged on an opening in the
floor. Vittoria looked down at the staircase descending into the void and suddenly wanted to turn
back. The guards were already helping the camerlegno onto the stairs. They helped her next.
“What became of him?” she asked, descending, trying to keep her voice steady. “The cardinal
who took you in?”
“He left the College of Cardinals for another position.”
Vittoria was surprised.
“And then, I’m sorry to say, he passed on.”
“Le mie condoglianze ,” Vittoria said. “Recently?”
The camerlegno turned, shadows accentuating the pain on his face. “Exactly fifteen days ago.
We are going to see him right now.”
84
The dark lights glowed hot inside the archival vault. This vault was much smaller than the
previous one Langdon had been in. Less air. Less time . He wished he’d asked Olivetti to turn on
the recirculating fans.
Langdon quickly located the section of assets containing the ledgers cataloging Belle Arti .
The section was impossible to miss. It occupied almost eight full stacks. The Catholic church
owned millions of individual pieces worldwide.
Langdon scanned the shelves searching for Gianlorenzo Bernini. He began his search about
midway down the first stack, at about the spot he thought the B ’s would begin. After a moment of
panic fearing the ledger was missing, he realized, to his greater dismay, that the ledgers were not
arranged alphabetically. Why am I not surprised?
It was not until Langdon circled back to the beginning of the collection and climbed a rolling
ladder to the top shelf that he understood the vault’s organization. Perched precariously on the
upper stacks he found the fattest ledgers of all–those belonging to the masters of the
Renaissance–Michelangelo, Raphael, da Vinci, Botticelli. Langdon now realized, appropriate to a
vault called “Vatican Assets,” the ledgers were arranged by the overall monetary value of each
artist’s collection. Sandwiched between Raphael and Michelangelo, Langdon found the ledger
marked Bernini. It was over five inches thick.
Already short of breath and struggling with the cumbersome volume, Langdon descended the
ladder. Then, like a kid with a comic book, he spread himself out on the floor and opened the cover.
The book was cloth-bound and very solid. The ledger was handwritten in Italian. Each page
cataloged a single work, including a short description, date, location, cost of materials, and
sometimes a rough sketch of the piece. Langdon fanned through the pages… over eight hundred in
all. Bernini had been a busy man.
As a young student of art, Langdon had wondered how single artists could create so much
work in their lifetimes. Later he learned, much to his disappointment, that famous artists actually
created very little of their own work. They ran studios where they trained young artists to carry out
their designs. Sculptors like Bernini created miniatures in clay and hired others to enlarge them into
marble. Langdon knew that if Bernini had been required to personally complete all of his
commissions, he would still be working today.
“Index,” he said aloud, trying to ward off the mental cobwebs. He flipped to the back of the
book, intending to look under the letter F for titles containing the word fuòco –fire–but the F ’s
were not together. Langdon swore under his breath. What the hell do these people have against
alphabetizing?
The entries had apparently been logged chronologically, one by one, as Bernini created each
new work. Everything was listed by date. No help at all.
As Langdon stared at the list, another disheartening thought occurred to him. The title of the
sculpture he was looking for might not even contain the word Fire . The previous two
works–Habakkuk and the Angel and West Ponente –had not contained specific references to Earth
or Air .
He spent a minute or two flipping randomly through the ledger in hopes that an illustration
might jump out at him. Nothing did. He saw dozens of obscure works he had never heard of, but he
also saw plenty he recognized… Daniel and the Lion, Apollo and Daphne , as well as a half dozen
fountains. When he saw the fountains, his thoughts skipped momentarily ahead. Water. He
wondered if the fourth altar of science was a fountain. A fountain seemed a perfect tribute to water.
Langdon hoped they could catch the killer before he had to consider Water –Bernini had carved
dozens of fountains in Rome, most of them in front of churches.
Langdon turned back to the matter at hand. Fire . As he looked through the book, Vittoria’s
words encouraged him. You were familiar with the first two sculptures … you probably know this
one too . As he turned to the index again, he scanned for titles he knew. Some were familiar, but
none jumped out. Langdon now realized he would never complete his search before passing out, so
he decided, against his better judgment, that he would have to take the book outside the vault. It’s
only a ledger , he told himself. It’s not like I’m removing an original Galilean folio . Langdon
recalled the folio in his breast pocket and reminded himself to return it before leaving.
Hurrying now, he reached down to lift the volume, but as he did, he saw something that gave
him pause. Although there were numerous notations throughout the index, the one that had just
caught his eye seemed odd.
The note indicated that the famous Bernini sculpture, The Ecstasy of St. Teresa , shortly after
its unveiling, had been moved from its original location inside the Vatican. This in itself was not
what had caught Langdon’s eye. He was already familiar with the sculpture’s checkered past.
Though some thought it a masterpiece, Pope Urban VIII had rejected The Ecstasy of St. Teresa as
too sexually explicit for the Vatican. He had banished it to some obscure chapel across town. What
had caught Langdon’s eye was that the work had apparently been placed in one of the five churches
on his list. What was more, the note indicated it had been moved there per suggerimento del artista
.
By suggestion of the artist? Langdon was confused. It made no sense that Bernini had
suggested his masterpiece be hidden in some obscure location. All artists wanted their work
displayed prominently, not in some remote–
Langdon hesitated. Unless …
He was fearful even to entertain the notion. Was it possible? Had Bernini intentionally created
a work so explicit that it forced the Vatican to hide it in some out-of-the-way spot? A location
perhaps that Bernini himself could suggest? Maybe a remote church on a direct line with West
Ponente ’s breath?
As Langdon’s excitement mounted, his vague familiarity with the statue intervened, insisting
the work had nothing to do with fire . The sculpture, as anyone who had seen it could attest, was
anything but scientific–pornographic maybe, but certainly not scientific. An English critic had
once condemned The Ecstasy of St. Teresa as “the most unfit ornament ever to be placed in a
Christian Church.” Langdon certainly understood the controversy. Though brilliantly rendered, the
statue depicted St. Teresa on her back in the throes of a toe-curling orgasm. Hardly Vatican fare.
Langdon hurriedly flipped to the ledger’s description of the work. When he saw the sketch, he
felt an instantaneous and unexpected tingle of hope. In the sketch, St. Teresa did indeed appear to
be enjoying herself, but there was another figure in the statue who Langdon had forgotten was there.
An angel.
The sordid legend suddenly came back…
St. Teresa was a nun sainted after she claimed an angel had paid her a blissful visit in her
sleep. Critics later decided her encounter had probably been more sexual than spiritual. Scrawled at
the bottom of the ledger, Langdon saw a familiar excerpt. St. Teresa’s own words left little to the
imagination:
… his great golden spear… filled with fire… plunged into me several times… penetrated to
my entrails… a sweetness so extreme that one could not possibly wish it to stop.
Langdon smiled. If that’s not a metaphor for some serious sex, I don’t know what is . He was
smiling also because of the ledger’s description of the work. Although the paragraph was in Italian,
the word fuòco appeared a half dozen times:
… angel’s spear tipped with point of fire …
… angel’s head emanating rays of fire …
… woman inflamed by passion’s fire …
Langdon was not entirely convinced until he glanced up at the sketch again. The angel’s fiery
spear was raised like a beacon, pointing the way. Let angels guide you on your lofty quest . Even the
type of angel Bernini had selected seemed significant. It’s a seraphim , Langdon realized.
Seraphim literally means “the fiery one .”
Robert Langdon was not a man who had ever looked for confirmation from above, but when
he read the name of the church where the sculpture now resided, he decided he might become a
believer after all.
Santa Maria della Vittoria .
Vittoria , he thought, grinning. Perfect .
Staggering to his feet, Langdon felt a rush of dizziness. He glanced up the ladder, wondering
if he should replace the book. The hell with it , he thought. Father Jaqui can do it . He closed the
book and left it neatly at the bottom of the shelf.
As he made his way toward the glowing button on the vault’s electronic exit, he was breathing
in shallow gasps. Nonetheless, he felt rejuvenated by his good fortune.
His good fortune, however, ran out before he reached the exit.
Without warning, the vault let out a pained sigh. The lights dimmed, and the exit button went
dead. Then, like an enormous expiring beast, the archival complex went totally black. Someone had
just killed power.
85
The Holy Vatican Grottoes are located beneath the main floor of St. Peter’s Basilica. They are
the burial place of deceased Popes.
Vittoria reached the bottom of the spiral staircase and entered the grotto. The darkened tunnel
reminded her of CERN’s Large Hadron Collider–black and cold. Lit now only by the flashlights of
the Swiss Guards, the tunnel carried a distinctly incorporeal feel. On both sides, hollow niches lined
the walls. Recessed in the alcoves, as far as the lights let them see, the hulking shadows of
sarcophagi loomed.
An iciness raked her flesh. It’s the cold , she told herself, knowing that was only partially true.
She had the sense they were being watched, not by anyone in the flesh, but by specters in the dark.
On top of each tomb, in full papal vestments, lay life-sized semblances of each Pope, shown in
death, arms folded across their chests. The prostrate bodies seemed to emerge from within the
tombs, pressing upward against the marble lids as if trying to escape their mortal restraints. The
flashlight procession moved on, and the papal silhouettes rose and fell against the walls, stretching
and vanishing in a macabre shadowbox dance.
A silence had fallen across the group, and Vittoria couldn’t tell whether it was one of respect
or apprehension. She sensed both. The camerlegno moved with his eyes closed, as if he knew every
step by heart. Vittoria suspected he had made this eerie promenade many times since the Pope’s
death… perhaps to pray at his tomb for guidance.
I worked under the cardinal’s tutelage for many years , the camerlegno had said. He was like
a father to me . Vittoria recalled the camerlegno speaking those words in reference to the cardinal
who had “saved” him from the army. Now, however, Vittoria understood the rest of the story. That
very cardinal who had taken the camerlegno under his wing had apparently later risen to the papacy
and brought with him his young protégé to serve as chamberlain.
That explains a lot , Vittoria thought. She had always possessed a well-tuned perception for
others’ inner emotions, and something about the camerlegno had been nagging her all day. Since
meeting him, she had sensed an anguish more soulful and private than the overwhelming crisis he
now faced. Behind his pious calm, she saw a man tormented by personal demons. Now she knew
her instincts had been correct. Not only was he facing the most devastating threat in Vatican history,
but he was doing it without his mentor and friend… flying solo.
The guards slowed now, as if unsure where exactly in the darkness the most recent Pope was
buried. The camerlegno continued assuredly and stopped before a marble tomb that seemed to
glisten brighter than the others. Lying atop was a carved figure of the late Pope. When Vittoria
recognized his face from television, a shot of fear gripped her. What are we doing?
“I realize we do not have much time,” the camerlegno said. “I still ask we take a moment of
prayer.”
The Swiss Guard all bowed their heads where they were standing. Vittoria followed suit, her
heart pounding in the silence. The camerlegno knelt before the tomb and prayed in Italian. As
Vittoria listened to his words, an unexpected grief surfaced as tears… tears for her own mentor…
her own holy father. The camerlegno’s words seemed as appropriate for her father as they did for
the Pope.
“Supreme father, counselor, friend.” The camerlegno’s voice echoed dully around the ring.
“You told me when I was young that the voice in my heart was that of God. You told me I must
follow it no matter what painful places it leads. I hear that voice now, asking of me impossible
tasks. Give me strength. Bestow on me forgiveness. What I do… I do in the name of everything you
believe. Amen.”
“Amen,” the guards whispered.
Amen, Father . Vittoria wiped her eyes.
The camerlegno stood slowly and stepped away from the tomb. “Push the covering aside.”
The Swiss Guards hesitated. “Signore,” one said, “by law we are at your command.” He
paused. “We will do as you say…”
The camerlegno seemed to read the young man’s mind. “Someday I will ask your forgiveness
for placing you in this position. Today I ask for your obedience. Vatican laws are established to
protect this church. It is in that very spirit that I command you to break them now.”
There was a moment of silence and then the lead guard gave the order. The three men set
down their flashlights on the floor, and their shadows leapt overhead. Lit now from beneath, the
men advanced toward the tomb. Bracing their hands against the marble covering near the head of
the tomb, they planted their feet and prepared to push. On signal, they all thrust, straining against
the enormous slab. When the lid did not move at all, Vittoria found herself almost hoping it was too
heavy. She was suddenly fearful of what they would find inside.
The men pushed harder, and still the stone did not move.
“Ancora ,” the camerlegno said, rolling up the sleeves of his cassock and preparing to push
along with them. “Ora!” Everyone heaved.
Vittoria was about to offer her own help, but just then, the lid began to slide. The men dug in
again, and with an almost primal growl of stone on stone, the lid rotated off the top of the tomb and
came to rest at an angle–the Pope’s carved head now pushed back into the niche and his feet
extended out into the hallway.
Everyone stepped back.
Tentatively, a guard bent and retrieved his flashlight. Then he aimed it into the tomb. The
beam seemed to tremble a moment, and then the guard held it steady. The other guards gathered one
by one. Even in the darkness Vittoria sensed them recoil. In succession, they crossed themselves.
The camerlegno shuddered when he looked into the tomb, his shoulders dropping like
weights. He stood a long moment before turning away.
Vittoria had feared the corpse’s mouth might be clenched tight with rigor mortis and that she
would have to suggest breaking the jaw to see the tongue. She now saw it would be unnecessary.
The cheeks had collapsed, and the Pope’s mouth gaped wide.
His tongue was black as death.
86
No light. No sound.
The Secret Archives were black.
Fear, Langdon now realized, was an intense motivator. Short of breath, he fumbled through
the blackness toward the revolving door. He found the button on the wall and rammed his palm
against it. Nothing happened. He tried again. The door was dead.
Spinning blind, he called out, but his voice emerged strangled. The peril of his predicament
suddenly closed in around him. His lungs strained for oxygen as the adrenaline doubled his heart
rate. He felt like someone had just punched him in the gut.
When he threw his weight into the door, for an instant he thought he felt the door start to turn.
He pushed again, seeing stars. Now he realized it was the entire room turning, not the door.
Staggering away, Langdon tripped over the base of a rolling ladder and fell hard. He tore his knee
against the edge of a book stack. Swearing, he got up and groped for the ladder.
He found it. He had hoped it would be heavy wood or iron, but it was aluminum. He grabbed
the ladder and held it like a battering ram. Then he ran through the dark at the glass wall. It was
closer than he thought. The ladder hit head-on, bouncing off. From the feeble sound of the collision,
Langdon knew he was going to need a hell of a lot more than an aluminum ladder to break this
glass.
When he flashed on the semiautomatic, his hopes surged and then instantly fell. The weapon
was gone. Olivetti had relieved him of it in the Pope’s office, saying he did not want loaded
weapons around with the camerlegno present. It made sense at the time.
Langdon called out again, making less sound than the last time.
Next he remembered the walkie-talkie the guard had left on the table outside the vault. Why
the hell didn’t I bring it in! As the purple stars began to dance before his eyes, Langdon forced
himself to think. You’ve been trapped before , he told himself. You survived worse. You were just a
kid and you figured it out . The crushing darkness came flooding in. Think!
Langdon lowered himself onto the floor. He rolled over on his back and laid his hands at his
sides. The first step was to gain control.
Relax. Conserve .
No longer fighting gravity to pump blood, Langdon’s heart began to slow. It was a trick
swimmers used to re-oxygenate their blood between tightly scheduled races.
There is plenty of air in here , he told himself. Plenty. Now think . He waited, half-expecting
the lights to come back on at any moment. They did not. As he lay there, able to breathe better now,
an eerie resignation came across him. He felt peaceful. He fought it.
You will move, damn it! But where …
On Langdon’s wrist, Mickey Mouse glowed happily as if enjoying the dark: 9:33 P.M. Half
an hour until Fire . Langdon thought it felt a whole hell of a lot later. His mind, instead of coming
up with a plan for escape, was suddenly demanding an explanation. Who turned off the power? Was
Rocher expanding his search? Wouldn’t Olivetti have warned Rocher that I’m in here! Langdon
knew at this point it made no difference.
Opening his mouth wide and tipping back his head, Langdon pulled the deepest breaths he
could manage. Each breath burned a little less than the last. His head cleared. He reeled his thoughts
in and forced the gears into motion.
Glass walls , he told himself. But damn thick glass .
He wondered if any of the books in here were stored in heavy, steel, fireproof file cabinets.
Langdon had seen them from time to time in other archives but had seen none here. Besides, finding
one in the dark could prove time-consuming. Not that he could lift one anyway, particularly in his
present state.
How about the examination table? Langdon knew this vault, like the other, had an
examination table in the center of the stacks. So what? He knew he couldn’t lift it. Not to mention,
even if he could drag it, he wouldn’t get it far. The stacks were closely packed, the aisles between
them far too narrow.
The aisles are too narrow …
Suddenly, Langdon knew.
With a burst of confidence, he jumped to his feet far too fast. Swaying in the fog of a head
rush, he reached out in the dark for support. His hand found a stack. Waiting a moment, he forced
himself to conserve. He would need all of his strength to do this.
Positioning himself against the book stack like a football player against a training sled, he
planted his feet and pushed. If I can somehow tip the shelf . But it barely moved. He realigned and
pushed again. His feet slipped backward on the floor. The stack creaked but did not move.
He needed leverage.
Finding the glass wall again, he placed one hand on it to guide him as he raced in the dark
toward the far end of the vault. The back wall loomed suddenly, and he collided with it, crushing
his shoulder. Cursing, Langdon circled the shelf and grabbed the stack at about eye level. Then,
propping one leg on the glass behind him and another on the lower shelves, he started to climb.
Books fell around him, fluttering into the darkness. He didn’t care. Instinct for survival had long
since overridden archival decorum. He sensed his equilibrium was hampered by the total darkness
and closed his eyes, coaxing his brain to ignore visual input. He moved faster now. The air felt
leaner the higher he went. He scrambled toward the upper shelves, stepping on books, trying to gain
purchase, heaving himself upward. Then, like a rock climber conquering a rock face, Langdon
grasped the top shelf. Stretching his legs out behind him, he walked his feet up the glass wall until
he was almost horizontal.
Now or never, Robert , a voice urged. Just like the leg press in the Harvard gym .
With dizzying exertion, he planted his feet against the wall behind him, braced his arms and
chest against the stack, and pushed. Nothing happened.
Fighting for air, he repositioned and tried again, extending his legs. Ever so slightly, the stack
moved. He pushed again, and the stack rocked forward an inch or so and then back. Langdon took
advantage of the motion, inhaling what felt like an oxygenless breath and heaving again. The shelf
rocked farther.
Like a swing set , he told himself. Keep the rhythm. A little more .
Langdon rocked the shelf, extending his legs farther with each push. His quadriceps burned
now, and he blocked the pain. The pendulum was in motion. Three more pushes , he urged himself.
It only took two.
There was an instant of weightless uncertainty. Then, with a thundering of books sliding off
the shelves, Langdon and the shelf were falling forward.
Halfway to the ground, the shelf hit the stack next to it. Langdon hung on, throwing his
weight forward, urging the second shelf to topple. There was a moment of motionless panic, and
then, creaking under the weight, the second stack began to tip. Langdon was falling again.
Like enormous dominoes, the stacks began to topple, one after another. Metal on metal, books
tumbling everywhere. Langdon held on as his inclined stack bounced downward like a ratchet on a
jack. He wondered how many stacks there were in all. How much would they weigh? The glass at
the far end was thick…
Langdon’s stack had fallen almost to the horizontal when he heard what he was waiting for–a
different kind of collision. Far off. At the end of the vault. The sharp smack of metal on glass. The
vault around him shook, and Langdon knew the final stack, weighted down by the others, had hit
the glass hard. The sound that followed was the most unwelcome sound Langdon had ever heard.
Silence.
There was no crashing of glass, only the resounding thud as the wall accepted the weight of
the stacks now propped against it. He lay wide-eyed on the pile of books. Somewhere in the
distance there was a creaking. Langdon would have held his breath to listen, but he had none left to
hold.
One second. Two…
Then, as he teetered on the brink of unconsciousness, Langdon heard a distant yielding… a
ripple spidering outward through the glass. Suddenly, like a cannon, the glass exploded. The stack
beneath Langdon collapsed to the floor.
Like welcome rain on a desert, shards of glass tinkled downward in the dark. With a great
sucking hiss, the air gushed in.
Thirty seconds later, in the Vatican Grottoes, Vittoria was standing before a corpse when the
electronic squawk of a walkie-talkie broke the silence. The voice blaring out sounded short of
breath. “This is Robert Langdon! Can anyone hear me?”
Vittoria looked up. Robert ! She could not believe how much she suddenly wished he were
there.
The guards exchanged puzzled looks. One took a radio off his belt. “Mr. Langdon? You are
on channel three. The commander is waiting to hear from you on channel one.”
“I know he’s on channel one, damn it! I don’t want to speak to him. I want the camerlegno.
Now! Somebody find him for me.”
In the obscurity of the Secret Archives, Langdon stood amidst shattered glass and tried to
catch his breath. He felt a warm liquid on his left hand and knew he was bleeding. The
camerlegno’s voice spoke at once, startling Langdon.
“This is Camerlegno Ventresca. What’s going on?”
Langdon pressed the button, his heart still pounding. “I think somebody just tried to kill me!”
There was a silence on the line.
Langdon tried to calm himself. “I also know where the next killing is going to be.”
The voice that came back was not the camerlegno’s. It was Commander Olivetti’s: “Mr.
Langdon. Do not speak another word.”
87
Langdon’s watch, now smeared with blood, read 9:41 P.M. as he ran across the Courtyard of
the Belvedere and approached the fountain outside the Swiss Guard security center. His hand had
stopped bleeding and now felt worse than it looked. As he arrived, it seemed everyone convened at
once–Olivetti, Rocher, the camerlegno, Vittoria, and a handful of guards.
Vittoria hurried toward him immediately. “Robert, you’re hurt.”
Before Langdon could answer, Olivetti was before him. “Mr. Langdon, I’m relieved you’re
okay. I’m sorry about the crossed signals in the archives.”
“Crossed signals?” Langdon demanded. “You knew damn well–”
“It was my fault,” Rocher said, stepping forward, sounding contrite. “I had no idea you were
in the archives. Portions of our white zones are cross-wired with that building. We were extending
our search. I’m the one who killed power. If I had known…”
“Robert,” Vittoria said, taking his wounded hand in hers and looking it over, “the Pope was
poisoned. The Illuminati killed him.”
Langdon heard the words, but they barely registered. He was saturated. All he could feel was
the warmth of Vittoria’s hands.
The camerlegno pulled a silk handkerchief from his cassock and handed it to Langdon so he
could clean himself. The man said nothing. His green eyes seemed filled with a new fire.
“Robert,” Vittoria pressed, “you said you found where the next cardinal is going to be killed?”
Langdon felt flighty. “I do, it’s at the–”
“No,” Olivetti interrupted. “Mr. Langdon, when I asked you not to speak another word on the
walkie-talkie, it was for a reason.” He turned to the handful of assembled Swiss Guards. “Excuse
us, gentlemen.”
The soldiers disappeared into the security center. No indignity. Only compliance.
Olivetti turned back to the remaining group. “As much as it pains me to say this, the murder
of our Pope is an act that could only have been accomplished with help from within these walls. For
the good of all, we can trust no one. Including our guards.” He seemed to be suffering as he spoke
the words.
Rocher looked anxious. “Inside collusion implies–”
“Yes,” Olivetti said. “The integrity of your search is compromised. And yet it is a gamble we
must take. Keep looking.”
Rocher looked like he was about to say something, thought better of it, and left.
The camerlegno inhaled deeply. He had not said a word yet, and Langdon sensed a new rigor
in the man, as if a turning point had been reached.
“Commander?” The camerlegno’s tone was impermeable. “I am going to break conclave.”
Olivetti pursed his lips, looking dour. “I advise against it. We still have two hours and twenty
minutes.”
“A heartbeat.”
Olivetti’s tone was now challenging “What do you intend to do? Evacuate the cardinals
single-handedly?”
“I intend to save this church with whatever power God has given me. How I proceed is no
longer your concern.”
Olivetti straightened. “Whatever you intend to do…” He paused. “I do not have the authority
to restrain you. Particularly in light of my apparent failure as head of security. I ask only that you
wait. Wait twenty minutes… until after ten o’clock. If Mr. Langdon’s information is correct, I may
still have a chance to catch this assassin. There is still a chance to preserve protocol and decorum.”
“Decorum?” The camerlegno let out a choked laugh. “We have long since passed propriety,
commander. In case you hadn’t noticed, this is war.”
A guard emerged from the security center and called out to the camerlegno, “Signore, I just
got word we have detained the BBC reporter, Mr. Glick.”
The camerlegno nodded. “Have both he and his camerawoman meet me outside the Sistine
Chapel.”
Olivetti’s eyes widened. “What are you doing?”
“Twenty minutes, commander. That’s all I’m giving you.” Then he was gone.
When Olivetti’s Alpha Romeo tore out of Vatican City, this time there was no line of
unmarked cars following him. In the back seat, Vittoria bandaged Langdon’s hand with a first-aid
kit she’d found in the glove box.
Olivetti stared straight ahead. “Okay, Mr. Langdon. Where are we going?”
88
Even with its siren now affixed and blaring, Olivetti’s Alpha Romeo seemed to go unnoticed
as it rocketed across the bridge into the heart of old Rome. All the traffic was moving in the other
direction, toward the Vatican, as if the Holy See had suddenly become the hottest entertainment in
Rome.
Langdon sat in the backseat, the questions whipping through his mind. He wondered about the
killer, if they would catch him this time, if he would tell them what they needed to know, if it was
already too late. How long before the camerlegno told the crowd in St. Peter’s Square they were in
danger? The incident in the vault still nagged. A mistake .
Olivetti never touched the brakes as he snaked the howling Alpha Romeo toward the Church
of Santa Maria della Vittoria. Langdon knew on any other day his knuckles would have been white.
At the moment, however, he felt anesthetized. Only the throbbing in his hand reminded him where
he was.
Overhead, the siren wailed. Nothing like telling him we’re coming , Langdon thought. And yet
they were making incredible time. He guessed Olivetti would kill the siren as they drew nearer.
Now with a moment to sit and reflect, Langdon felt a tinge of amazement as the news of the
Pope’s murder finally registered in his mind. The thought was inconceivable, and yet somehow it
seemed a perfectly logical event. Infiltration had always been the Illuminati
powerbase–rearrangements of power from within. And it was not as if Popes had never been
murdered. Countless rumors of treachery abounded, although with no autopsy, none was ever
confirmed. Until recently. Academics not long ago had gotten permission to X-ray the tomb of Pope
Celestine V, who had allegedly died at the hands of his overeager successor, Boniface VIII. The
researchers had hoped the X-ray might reveal some small hint of foul play–a broken bone perhaps.
Incredibly, the X-ray had revealed a ten-inch nail driven into the Pope’s skull.
Langdon now recalled a series of news clippings fellow Illuminati buffs had sent him years
ago. At first he had thought the clippings were a prank, so he’d gone to the Harvard microfiche
collection to confirm the articles were authentic. Incredibly, they were. He now kept them on his
bulletin board as examples of how even respectable news organizations sometimes got carried away
with Illuminati paranoia. Suddenly, the media’s suspicions seemed a lot less paranoid. Langdon
could see the articles clearly in his mind…
The British Broadcasting Corporation
June 14, 1998
Pope John Paul I, who died in 1978, fell victim to a plot by the P2 Masonic Lodge… The
secret society P2 decided to murder John Paul I when it saw he was determined to dismiss the
American Archbishop Paul Marcinkus as President of the Vatican Bank. The Bank had been
implicated in shady financial deals with the Masonic Lodge…
The New York Times
August 24, 1998
Why was the late John Paul I wearing his day shirt in bed? Why was it torn? The questions
don’t stop there. No medical investigations were made. Cardinal Villot forbade an autopsy on the
grounds that no Pope was ever given a postmortem. And John Paul’s medicines mysteriously
vanished from his bedside, as did his glasses, slippers and his last will and testament.
London Daily Mail
August 27, 1998
… a plot including a powerful, ruthless and illegal Masonic lodge with tentacles stretching
into the Vatican.
The cellular in Vittoria’s pocket rang, thankfully erasing the memories from Langdon’s mind.
Vittoria answered, looking confused as to who might be calling her. Even from a few feet
away, Langdon recognized the laserlike voice on the phone.
“Vittoria? This is Maximilian Kohler. Have you found the antimatter yet?”
“Max? You’re okay?”
“I saw the news. There was no mention of CERN or the antimatter. This is good. What is
happening?”
“We haven’t located the canister yet. The situation is complex. Robert Langdon has been
quite an asset. We have a lead on catching the man assassinating cardinals. Right now we are
headed–”
“Ms. Vetra,” Olivetti interrupted. “You’ve said enough.”
She covered the receiver, clearly annoyed. “Commander, this is the president of CERN.
Certainly he has a right to–”
“He has a right,” Olivetti snapped, “to be here handling this situation. You’re on an open
cellular line. You’ve said enough.”
Vittoria took a deep breath. “Max?”
“I may have some information for you,” Max said. “About your father… I may know who he
told about the antimatter.”
Vittoria’s expression clouded. “Max, my father said he told no one.”
“I’m afraid, Vittoria, your father did tell someone. I need to check some security records. I
will be in touch soon.” The line went dead.
Vittoria looked waxen as she returned the phone to her pocket.
“You okay?” Langdon asked.
Vittoria nodded, her trembling fingers revealing the lie.
“The church is on Piazza Barberini,” Olivetti said, killing the siren and checking his watch.
“We have nine minutes.”
When Langdon had first realized the location of the third marker, the position of the church
had rung some distant bell for him. Piazza Barberini . Something about the name was familiar…
something he could not place. Now Langdon realized what it was. The piazza was the sight of a
controversial subway stop. Twenty years ago, construction of the subway terminal had created a stir
among art historians who feared digging beneath Piazza Barberini might topple the multiton obelisk
that stood in the center. City planners had removed the obelisk and replaced it with a small fountain
called the Triton .
In Bernini’s day , Langdon now realized, Piazza Barberini had contained an obelisk!
Whatever doubts Langdon had felt that this was the location of the third marker now totally
evaporated.
A block from the piazza, Olivetti turned into an alley, gunned the car halfway down, and
skidded to a stop. He pulled off his suit jacket, rolled up his sleeves, and loaded his weapon.
“We can’t risk your being recognized,” he said. “You two were on television. I want you
across the piazza, out of sight, watching the front entrance. I’m going in the back.” He produced a
familiar pistol and handed it to Langdon. “Just in case.”
Langdon frowned. It was the second time today he had been handed the gun. He slid it into
his breast pocket. As he did, he realized he was still carrying the folio from Diagramma . He
couldn’t believe he had forgotten to leave it behind. He pictured the Vatican Curator collapsing in
spasms of outrage at the thought of this priceless artifact being packed around Rome like some
tourist map. Then Langdon thought of the mess of shattered glass and strewn documents that he’d
left behind in the archives. The curator had other problems. If the archives even survive the night …
Olivetti got out of the car and motioned back up the alley. “The piazza is that way. Keep your
eyes open and don’t let yourselves be seen.” He tapped the phone on his belt. “Ms. Vetra, let’s
retest our auto dial.”
Vittoria removed her phone and hit the auto dial number she and Olivetti had programmed at
the Pantheon. Olivetti’s phone vibrated in silent-ring mode on his belt.
The commander nodded. “Good. If you see anything, I want to know.” He cocked his
weapon. “I’ll be inside waiting. This heathen is mine.”
At that moment, very nearby, another cellular phone was ringing.
The Hassassin answered. “Speak.”
“It is I,” the voice said. “Janus.”
The Hassassin smiled. “Hello, master.”
“Your position may be known. Someone is coming to stop you.”
“They are too late. I have already made the arrangements here.”
“Good. Make sure you escape alive. There is work yet to be done.”
“Those who stand in my way will die.”
“Those who stand in your way are knowledgeable.”
“You speak of an American scholar?”
“You are aware of him?”
The Hassassin chuckled. “Cool-tempered but naive. He spoke to me on the phone earlier. He
is with a female who seems quite the opposite.” The killer felt a stirring of arousal as he recalled the
fiery temperament of Leonardo Vetra’s daughter.
There was a momentary silence on the line, the first hesitation the Hassassin had ever sensed
from his Illuminati master. Finally, Janus spoke. “Eliminate them if need be.”
The killer smiled. “Consider it done.” He felt a warm anticipation spreading through his body.
Although the woman I may keep as a prize .
89
War had broken out in St. Peter’s Square.
The piazza had exploded into a frenzy of aggression. Media trucks skidded into place like
assault vehicles claiming beachheads. Reporters unfurled high-tech electronics like soldiers arming
for battle. All around the perimeter of the square, networks jockeyed for position as they raced to
erect the newest weapon in media wars–flat-screen displays.
Flat-screen displays were enormous video screens that could be assembled on top of trucks or
portable scaffolding. The screens served as a kind of billboard advertisement for the network,
broadcasting that network’s coverage and corporate logo like a drive-in movie. If a screen were
well-situated–in front of the action, for example–a competing network could not shoot the story
without including an advertisement for their competitor.
The square was quickly becoming not only a multimedia extravaganza, but a frenzied public
vigil. Onlookers poured in from all directions. Open space in the usually limitless square was fast
becoming a valuable commodity. People clustered around the towering flat-screen displays,
listening to live reports in stunned excitement.
Only a hundred yards away, inside the thick walls of St. Peter’s Basilica, the world was
serene. Lieutenant Chartrand and three other guards moved through the darkness. Wearing their
infrared goggles, they fanned out across the nave, swinging their detectors before them. The search
of Vatican City’s public access areas so far had yielded nothing.
“Better remove your goggles up here,” the senior guard said.
Chartrand was already doing it. They were nearing the Niche of the Palliums–the sunken area
in the center of the basilica. It was lit by ninety-nine oil lamps, and the amplified infrared would
have seared their eyes.
Chartrand enjoyed being out of the heavy goggles, and he stretched his neck as they
descended into the sunken niche to scan the area. The room was beautiful… golden and glowing.
He had not been down here yet.
It seemed every day since Chartrand had arrived in Vatican City he had learned some new
Vatican mystery. These oil lamps were one of them. There were exactly ninety-nine lamps burning
at all times. It was tradition. The clergy vigilantly refilled the lamps with sacred oils such that no
lamp ever burned out. It was said they would burn until the end of time.
Or at least until midnight , Chartrand thought, feeling his mouth go dry again.
Chartrand swung his detector over the oil lamps. Nothing hidden in here. He was not
surprised; the canister, according to the video feed, was hidden in a dark area.
As he moved across the niche, he came to a bulkhead grate covering a hole in the floor. The
hole led to a steep and narrow stairway that went straight down. He had heard stories about what lay
down there. Thankfully, they would not have to descend. Rocher’s orders were clear. Search only
the public access areas; ignore the white zones .
“What’s that smell?” he asked, turning away from the grate. The niche smelled intoxicatingly
sweet.
“Fumes from the lamps,” one of them replied.
Chartrand was surprised. “Smells more like cologne than kerosene.”
“It’s not kerosene. These lamps are close to the papal altar, so they take a special, ambiental
mixture–ethanol, sugar, butane, and perfume.”
“Butane?” Chartrand eyed the lamps uneasily.
The guard nodded. “Don’t spill any. Smells like heaven, but burns like hell.”
The guards had completed searching the Niche of the Palliums and were moving across the
basilica again when their walkie-talkies went off.
It was an update. The guards listened in shock.
Apparently there were troubling new developments, which could not be shared on-air, but the
camerlegno had decided to break tradition and enter conclave to address the cardinals. Never before
in history had this been done. Then again, Chartrand realized, never before in history had the
Vatican been sitting on what amounted to some sort of neoteric nuclear warhead.
Chartrand felt comforted to know the camerlegno was taking control. The camerlegno was the
person inside Vatican City for whom Chartrand held the most respect. Some of the guards thought
of the camerlegno as a beato –a religious zealot whose love of God bordered on obsession–but even
they agreed… when it came to fighting the enemies of God, the camerlegno was the one man who
would stand up and play hardball.
The Swiss Guards had seen a lot of the camerlegno this week in preparation for conclave, and
everyone had commented that the man seemed a bit rough around the edges, his verdant eyes a bit
more intense than usual. Not surprisingly, they had all commented; not only was the camerlegno
responsible for planning the sacred conclave, but he had to do it immediately on the heels of the
loss of his mentor, the Pope.
Chartrand had only been at the Vatican a few months when he heard the story of the bomb
that blew up the camerlegno’s mother before the kid’s very eyes. A bomb in church… and now it’s
happening all over again . Sadly, the authorities never caught the bastards who planted the bomb…
probably some anti-Christian hate group they said, and the case faded away. No wonder the
camerlegno despised apathy.
A couple months back, on a peaceful afternoon inside Vatican City, Chartrand had bumped
into the camerlegno coming across the grounds. The camerlegno had apparently recognized
Chartrand as a new guard and invited him to accompany him on a stroll. They had talked about
nothing in particular, and the camerlegno made Chartrand feel immediately at home.
“Father,” Chartrand said, “may I ask you a strange question?”
The camerlegno smiled. “Only if I may give you a strange answer.”
Chartrand laughed. “I have asked every priest I know, and I still don’t understand.”
“What troubles you?” The camerlegno led the way in short, quick strides, his frock kicking
out in front of him as he walked. His black, crepe-sole shoes seemed befitting, Chartrand thought,
like reflections of the man’s essence… modern but humble, and showing signs of wear.
Chartrand took a deep breath. “I don’t understand this omnipotent-benevolent thing.”
The camerlegno smiled. “You’ve been reading Scripture.”
“I try.”
“You are confused because the Bible describes God as an omnipotent and benevolent deity.”
“Exactly.”
“Omnipotent-benevolent simply means that God is all-powerful and well-meaning.”
“I understand the concept. It’s just… there seems to be a contradiction.”
“Yes. The contradiction is pain. Man’s starvation, war, sickness…”
“Exactly!” Chartrand knew the camerlegno would understand. “Terrible things happen in this
world. Human tragedy seems like proof that God could not possibly be both all-powerful and
well-meaning. If He loves us and has the power to change our situation, He would prevent our
pain, wouldn’t He?”
The camerlegno frowned. “Would He?”
Chartrand felt uneasy. Had he overstepped his bounds? Was this one of those religious
questions you just didn’t ask? “Well… if God loves us, and He can protect us, He would have to.
It seems He is either omnipotent and uncaring, or benevolent and powerless to help.”
“Do you have children, Lieutenant?”
Chartrand flushed. “No, signore.”
“Imagine you had an eight-year-old son… would you love him?”
“Of course.”
“Would you do everything in your power to prevent pain in his life?”
“Of course.”
“Would you let him skateboard?”
Chartrand did a double take. The camerlegno always seemed oddly “in touch” for a
clergyman. “Yeah, I guess,” Chartrand said. “Sure, I’d let him skateboard, but I’d tell him to be
careful.”
“So as this child’s father, you would give him some basic, good advice and then let him go off
and make his own mistakes?”
“I wouldn’t run behind him and mollycoddle him if that’s what you mean.”
“But what if he fell and skinned his knee?”
“He would learn to be more careful.”
The camerlegno smiled. “So although you have the power to interfere and prevent your
child’s pain, you would choose to show your love by letting him learn his own lessons?”
“Of course. Pain is part of growing up. It’s how we learn.”
The camerlegno nodded. “Exactly.”
90
Langdon and Vittoria observed Piazza Barberini from the shadows of a small alleyway on the
western corner. The church was opposite them, a hazy cupola emerging from a faint cluster of
buildings across the square. The night had brought with it a welcome cool, and Langdon was
surprised to find the square deserted. Above them, through open windows, blaring televisions
reminded Langdon where everyone had disappeared to.
“… no comment yet from the Vatican… Illuminati murders of two cardinals…
satanic presence in Rome… speculation about further infiltration…”
The news had spread like Nero’s fire. Rome sat riveted, as did the rest of the world. Langdon
wondered if they would really be able to stop this runaway train. As he scanned the piazza and
waited, Langdon realized that despite the encroachment of modern buildings, the piazza still looked
remarkably elliptical. High above, like some sort of modern shrine to a bygone hero, an enormous
neon sign blinked on the roof of a luxurious hotel. Vittoria had already pointed it out to Langdon.
The sign seemed eerily befitting.
HOTEL BERNINI
“Five of ten,” Vittoria said, cat eyes darting around the square. No sooner had she spoken the
words than she grabbed Langdon’s arm and pulled him back into the shadows. She motioned into
the center of the square.
Langdon followed her gaze. When he saw it, he stiffened.
Crossing in front of them, beneath a street lamp, two dark figures appeared. Both were
cloaked, their heads covered with dark mantles , the traditional black covering of Catholic widows.
Langdon would have guessed they were women, but he couldn’t be sure in the dark. One looked
elderly and moved as if in pain, hunched over. The other, larger and stronger, was helping.
“Give me the gun,” Vittoria said.
“You can’t just–”
Fluid as a cat, Vittoria was in and out of his pocket once again. The gun glinted in her hand.
Then, in absolute silence, as if her feet never touched the cobblestone, she was circling left in the
shadows, arching across the square to approach the couple from the rear. Langdon stood transfixed
as Vittoria disappeared. Then, swearing to himself, he hurried after her.
The couple was moving slowly, and it was only a matter of half a minute before Langdon and
Vittoria were positioned behind them, closing in from the rear. Vittoria concealed the gun beneath
casually crossed arms in front of her, out of sight but accessible in a flash. She seemed to float
faster and faster as the gap lessened, and Langdon battled to keep up. When his shoes scuffed a
stone and sent it skittering, Vittoria shot him a sideways glare. But the couple did not seem to hear.
They were talking.
At thirty feet, Langdon could start to hear voices. No words. Just faint murmurings. Beside
him, Vittoria moved faster with every step. Her arms loosened before her, the gun starting to peek
out. Twenty feet. The voices were clearer–one much louder than the other. Angry. Ranting.
Langdon sensed it was the voice of an old woman. Gruff. Androgynous. He strained to hear what
she was saying, but another voice cut the night.
“Mi scusi!” Vittoria’s friendly tone lit the square like a torch.
Langdon tensed as the cloaked couple stopped short and began to turn. Vittoria kept striding
toward them, even faster now, on a collision course. They would have no time to react. Langdon
realized his own feet had stopped moving. From behind, he saw Vittoria’s arms loosening, her hand
coming free, the gun swinging forward. Then, over her shoulder, he saw a face, lit now in the street
lamp. The panic surged to his legs, and he lunged forward. “Vittoria, no!”
Vittoria, however, seemed to exist a split second ahead of him. In a motion as swift as it was
casual, Vittoria’s arms were raised again, the gun disappearing as she clutched herself like a woman
on a chilly night. Langdon stumbled to her side, almost colliding with the cloaked couple before
them.
“Buona sera ,” Vittoria blurted, her voice startled with retreat.
Langdon exhaled in relief. Two elderly women stood before them scowling out from beneath
their mantles. One was so old she could barely stand. The other was helping her. Both clutched
rosaries. They seemed confused by the sudden interruption.
Vittoria smiled, although she looked shaken. “Dov’è la chiesa Santa Maria della Vittoria?
Where is the Church of–”
The two women motioned in unison to a bulky silhouette of a building on an inclined street
from the direction they had come. “È là .”
“Grazie ,” Langdon said, putting his hands on Vittoria’s shoulders and gently pulling her
back. He couldn’t believe they’d almost attacked a pair of old ladies.
“Non si puó entrare ,” one woman warned. “È chiusa temprano .”
“Closed early?” Vittoria looked surprised. “Perchè? ”
Both women explained at once. They sounded irate. Langdon understood only parts of the
grumbling Italian. Apparently, the women had been inside the church fifteen minutes ago praying
for the Vatican in its time of need, when some man had appeared and told them the church was
closing early.
“Hanno conosciuto l’uomo?” Vittoria demanded, sounding tense. “Did you know the man?”
The women shook their heads. The man was a straniero crudo , they explained, and he had
forcibly made everyone inside leave, even the young priest and janitor, who said they were calling
the police. But the intruder had only laughed, telling them to be sure the police brought cameras.
Cameras? Langdon wondered.
The women clucked angrily and called the man a bar-?rabo . Then, grumbling, they
continued on their way.
“Bar-?rabo?” Langdon asked Vittoria. “A barbarian?”
Vittoria looked suddenly taut. “Not quite. Bar-?rabo is derogatory wordplay. It means
?rabo … Arab.”
Langdon felt a shiver and turned toward the outline of the church. As he did, his eyes
glimpsed something in the church’s stained-glass windows. The image shot dread through his body.
Unaware, Vittoria removed her cell phone and pressed the auto dial. “I’m warning Olivetti.”
Speechless, Langdon reached out and touched her arm. With a tremulous hand, he pointed to
the church.
Vittoria let out a gasp.
Inside the building, glowing like evil eyes through the stained-glass windows… shone the
growing flash of flames.
91
Langdon and Vittoria dashed to the main entrance of the church of Santa Maria della Vittoria
and found the wooden door locked. Vittoria fired three shots from Olivetti’s semi-automatic into the
ancient bolt, and it shattered.
The church had no anteroom, so the entirety of the sanctuary spread out in one gasping sweep
as Langdon and Vittoria threw open the main door. The scene before them was so unexpected, so
bizarre, that Langdon had to close his eyes and reopen them before his mind could take it all in.
The church was lavish baroque… gilded walls and altars. Dead center of the sanctuary,
beneath the main cupola, wooden pews had been stacked high and were now ablaze in some sort of
epic funeral pyre. A bonfire shooting high into the dome. As Langdon’s eyes followed the inferno
upward, the true horror of the scene descended like a bird of prey.
High overhead, from the left and right sides of the ceiling, hung two incensor cables–lines
used for swinging frankincense vessels above the congregation. These lines, however, carried no
incensors now. Nor were they swinging. They had been used for something else…
Suspended from the cables was a human being. A naked man. Each wrist had been connected
to an opposing cable, and he had been hoisted almost to the point of being torn apart. His arms were
outstretched in a spread-eagle as if he were nailed to some sort of invisible crucifix hovering within
the house of God.
Langdon felt paralyzed as he stared upward. A moment later, he witnessed the final
abomination. The old man was alive, and he raised his head. A pair of terrified eyes gazed down in
a silent plea for help. On the man’s chest was a scorched emblem. He had been branded. Langdon
could not see it clearly, but he had little doubt what the marking said. As the flames climbed higher,
lapping at the man’s feet, the victim let out a cry of pain, his body trembling.
As if ignited by some unseen force, Langdon felt his body suddenly in motion, dashing down
the main aisle toward the conflagration. His lungs filled with smoke as he closed in. Ten feet from
the inferno, at a full sprint, Langdon hit a wall of heat. The skin on his face singed, and he fell back,
shielding his eyes and landing hard on the marble floor. Staggering upright, he pressed forward
again, hands raised in protection.
Instantly he knew. The fire was far too hot.
Moving back again, he scanned the chapel walls. A heavy tapestry , he thought. If I can
somehow smother the… But he knew a tapestry was not to be found. This is a baroque chapel,
Robert, not some damn German castle! Think! He forced his eyes back to the suspended man.
High above, smoke and flames swirled in the cupola. The incensor cables stretched outward
from the man’s wrists, rising to the ceiling where they passed through pulleys, and descended again
to metal cleats on either side of the church. Langdon looked over at one of the cleats. It was high on
the wall, but he knew if he could get to it and loosen one of the lines, the tension would slacken and
the man would swing wide of the fire.
A sudden surge of flames crackled higher, and Langdon heard a piercing scream from above.
The skin on the man’s feet was starting to blister. The cardinal was being roasted alive. Langdon
fixed his sights on the cleat and ran for it.
In the rear of the church, Vittoria clutched the back of a pew, trying to gather her senses. The
image overhead was horrid. She forced her eyes away. Do something! She wondered where
Olivetti was. Had he seen the Hassassin? Had he caught him? Where were they now? Vittoria
moved forward to help Langdon, but as she did, a sound stopped her.
The crackling of the flames was getting louder by the instant, but a second sound also cut the
air. A metallic vibration. Nearby. The repetitive pulse seemed to emanate from the end of the pews
to her left. It was a stark rattle, like the ringing of a phone, but stony and hard. She clutched the gun
firmly and moved down the row of pews. The sound grew louder. On. Off. A recurrent vibration.
As she approached the end of the aisle, she sensed the sound was coming from the floor just
around the corner at the end of the pews. As she moved forward, gun outstretched in her right hand,
she realized she was also holding something in her left hand–her cell phone. In her panic she had
forgotten that outside she had used it to dial the commander… setting off his phone’s silent
vibration feature as a warning. Vittoria raised her phone to her ear. It was still ringing. The
commander had never answered. Suddenly, with rising fear, Vittoria sensed she knew what was
making the sound. She stepped forward, trembling.
The entire church seemed to sink beneath her feet as her eyes met the lifeless form on the
floor. No stream of liquid flowed from the body. No signs of violence tattooed the flesh. There was
only the fearful geometry of the commander’s head… torqued backward, twisted 180 degrees in the
wrong direction. Vittoria fought the images of her own father’s mangled body.
The phone on the commander’s belt lay against the floor, vibrating over and over against the
cold marble. Vittoria hung up her own phone, and the ringing stopped. In the silence, Vittoria heard
a new sound. A breathing in the dark directly behind her.
She started to spin, gun raised, but she knew she was too late. A laser beam of heat screamed
from the top of her skull to the soles of her feet as the killer’s elbow crashed down on the back of
her neck.
“Now you are mine,” a voice said.
Then, everything went black.
Across the sanctuary, on the left lateral wall, Langdon balanced atop a pew and scraped
upward on the wall trying to reach the cleat. The cable was still six feet above his head. Cleats like
these were common in churches and were placed high to prevent tampering. Langdon knew priests
used wooden ladders called piuòli to access the cleats. The killer had obviously used the church’s
ladder to hoist his victim. So where the hell is the ladder now! Langdon looked down, searching
the floor around him. He had a faint recollection of seeing a ladder in here somewhere. But where?
A moment later his heart sank. He realized where he had seen it. He turned toward the raging fire.
Sure enough, the ladder was high atop the blaze, engulfed in flames.
Filled now with desperation, Langdon scanned the entire church from his raised platform,
looking for anything at all that could help him reach the cleat. As his eyes probed the church, he had
a sudden realization.
Where the hell is Vittoria? She had disappeared. Did she go for help? Langdon screamed
out her name, but there was no response. And where is Olivetti?
There was a howl of pain from above, and Langdon sensed he was already too late. As his
eyes went skyward again and saw the slowly roasting victim, Langdon had thoughts for only one
thing. Water. Lots of it. Put out the fire. At least lower the flames .” I need water, damn it!” he
yelled out loud.
“That’s next,” a voice growled from the back of the church.
Langdon wheeled, almost falling off the pews.
Striding up the side aisle directly toward him came a dark monster of a man. Even in the glow
of the fire, his eyes burned black. Langdon recognized the gun in his hand as the one from his own
jacket pocket… the one Vittoria had been carrying when they came in.
The sudden wave of panic that rose in Langdon was a frenzy of disjunct fears. His initial
instinct was for Vittoria. What had this animal done to her? Was she hurt? Or worse ? In the same
instant, Langdon realized the man overhead was screaming louder. The cardinal would die. Helping
him now was impossible. Then, as the Hassassin leveled the gun at Langdon’s chest, Langdon’s
panic turned inward, his senses on overload. He reacted on instinct as the shot went off. Launching
off the bench, Langdon sailed arms first over the sea of church pews.
When he hit the pews, he hit harder than he had imagined, immediately rolling to the floor.
The marble cushioned his fall with all the grace of cold steel. Footsteps closed to his right. Langdon
turned his body toward the front of the church and began scrambling for his life beneath the pews.
High above the chapel floor, Cardinal Guidera endured his last torturous moments of
consciousness. As he looked down the length of his naked body, he saw the skin on his legs begin
to blister and peel away. I am in hell , he decided. God, why hast thou forsaken me? He knew this
must be hell because he was looking at the brand on his chest upside down… and yet, as if by the
devil’s magic, the word made perfect sense.
92
Three ballotings. No Pope.
Inside the Sistine Chapel, Cardinal Mortati had begun praying for a miracle. Send us the
candidates! The delay had gone long enough. A single missing candidate, Mortati could
understand. But all four? It left no options. Under these conditions, achieving a two-thirds majority
would take an act of God Himself.
When the bolts on the outer door began to grind open, Mortati and the entire College of
Cardinals wheeled in unison toward the entrance. Mortati knew this unsealing could mean only one
thing. By law, the chapel door could only be unsealed for two reasons–to remove the very ill, or to
admit late cardinals.
The preferiti are coming!
Mortati’s heart soared. Conclave had been saved.
But when the door opened, the gasp that echoed through the chapel was not one of joy.
Mortati stared in incredulous shock as the man walked in. For the first time in Vatican history, a
camerlegno had just crossed the sacred threshold of conclave after sealing the doors.
What is he thinking!
The camerlegno strode to the altar and turned to address the thunderstruck audience.
“Signori,” he said, “I have waited as long as I can. There is something you have a right to know.”
93
Langdon had no idea where he was going. Reflex was his only compass, driving him away
from danger. His elbows and knees burned as he clambered beneath the pews. Still he clawed on.
Somewhere a voice was telling him to move left. If you can get to the main aisle, you can dash for
the exit . He knew it was impossible. There’s a wall of flames blocking the main aisle! His mind
hunting for options, Langdon scrambled blindly on. The footsteps closed faster now to his right.
When it happened, Langdon was unprepared. He had guessed he had another ten feet of pews
until he reached the front of the church. He had guessed wrong. Without warning, the cover above
him ran out. He froze for an instant, half exposed at the front of the church. Rising in the recess to
his left, gargantuan from this vantage point, was the very thing that had brought him here. He had
entirely forgotten. Bernini’s Ecstasy of St. Teresa rose up like some sort of pornographic still
life… the saint on her back, arched in pleasure, mouth open in a moan, and over her, an angel
pointing his spear of fire.
A bullet exploded in the pew over Langdon’s head. He felt his body rise like a sprinter out of
a gate. Fueled only by adrenaline, and barely conscious of his actions, he was suddenly running,
hunched, head down, pounding across the front of the church to his right. As the bullets erupted
behind him, Langdon dove yet again, sliding out of control across the marble floor before crashing
in a heap against the railing of a niche on the right-hand wall.
It was then that he saw her. A crumpled heap near the back of the church. Vittoria! Her bare
legs were twisted beneath her, but Langdon sensed somehow that she was breathing. He had no
time to help her.
Immediately, the killer rounded the pews on the far left of the church and bore relentlessly
down. Langdon knew in a heartbeat it was over. The killer raised the weapon, and Langdon did the
only thing he could do. He rolled his body over the banister into the niche. As he hit the floor on the
other side, the marble columns of the balustrade exploded in a storm of bullets.
Langdon felt like a cornered animal as he scrambled deeper into the semicircular niche.
Rising before him, the niche’s sole contents seemed ironically apropos–a single sarcophagus. Mine
perhaps , Langdon thought. Even the casket itself seemed fitting. It was a sc?tola –a small,
unadorned, marble box. Burial on a budget. The casket was raised off the floor on two marble
blocks, and Langdon eyed the opening beneath it, wondering if he could slide through.
Footsteps echoed behind him.
With no other option in sight, Langdon pressed himself to the floor and slithered toward the
casket. Grabbing the two marble supports, one with each hand, he pulled like a breaststroker,
dragging his torso into the opening beneath the tomb. The gun went off.
Accompanying the roar of the gun, Langdon felt a sensation he had never felt in his life… a
bullet sailing past his flesh. There was a hiss of wind, like the backlash of a whip, as the bullet just
missed him and exploded in the marble with a puff of dust. Blood surging, Langdon heaved his
body the rest of the way beneath the casket. Scrambling across the marble floor, he pulled himself
out from beneath the casket and to the other side.
Dead end.
Langdon was now face to face with the rear wall of the niche. He had no doubt that this tiny
space behind the tomb would become his grave. And soon , he realized, as he saw the barrel of the
gun appear in the opening beneath the sarcophagus. The Hassassin held the weapon parallel with
the floor, pointing directly at Langdon’s midsection.
Impossible to miss.
Langdon felt a trace of self-preservation grip his unconscious mind. He twisted his body onto
his stomach, parallel with the casket. Facedown, he planted his hands flat on the floor, the glass cut
from the archives pinching open with a stab. Ignoring the pain, he pushed. Driving his body upward
in an awkward push-up, Langdon arched his stomach off the floor just as the gun went off. He could
feel the shock wave of the bullets as they sailed beneath him and pulverized the porous travertine
behind. Closing his eyes and straining against exhaustion, Langdon prayed for the thunder to stop.
And then it did.
The roar of gunfire was replaced with the cold click of an empty chamber.
Langdon opened his eyes slowly, almost fearful his eyelids would make a sound. Fighting the
trembling pain, he held his position, arched like a cat. He didn’t even dare breathe. His eardrums
numbed by gunfire, Langdon listened for any hint of the killer’s departure. Silence. He thought of
Vittoria and ached to help her.
The sound that followed was deafening. Barely human. A guttural bellow of exertion.
The sarcophagus over Langdon’s head suddenly seemed to rise on its side. Langdon collapsed
on the floor as hundreds of pounds teetered toward him. Gravity overcame friction, and the lid was
the first to go, sliding off the tomb and crashing to the floor beside him. The casket came next,
rolling off its supports and toppling upside down toward Langdon.
As the box rolled, Langdon knew he would either be entombed in the hollow beneath it or
crushed by one of the edges. Pulling in his legs and head, Langdon compacted his body and yanked
his arms to his sides. Then he closed his eyes and awaited the sickening crush.
When it came, the entire floor shook beneath him. The upper rim landed only millimeters
from the top of his head, rattling his teeth in their sockets. His right arm, which Langdon had been
certain would be crushed, miraculously still felt intact. He opened his eyes to see a shaft of light.
The right rim of the casket had not fallen all the way to the floor and was still propped partially on
its supports. Directly overhead, though, Langdon found himself staring quite literally into the face
of death.
The original occupant of the tomb was suspended above him, having adhered, as decaying
bodies often did, to the bottom of the casket. The skeleton hovered a moment, like a tentative lover,
and then with a sticky crackling, it succumbed to gravity and peeled away. The carcass rushed down
to embrace him, raining putrid bones and dust into Langdon’s eyes and mouth.
Before Langdon could react, a blind arm was slithering through the opening beneath the
casket, sifting through the carcass like a hungry python. It groped until it found Langdon’s neck and
clamped down. Langdon tried to fight back against the iron fist now crushing his larynx, but he
found his left sleeve pinched beneath the edge of the coffin. He had only one arm free, and the fight
was a losing battle.
Langdon’s legs bent in the only open space he had, his feet searching for the casket floor
above him. He found it. Coiling, he planted his feet. Then, as the hand around his neck squeezed
tighter, Langdon closed his eyes and extended his legs like a ram. The casket shifted, ever so
slightly, but enough.
With a raw grinding, the sarcophagus slid off the supports and landed on the floor. The casket
rim crashed onto the killer’s arm, and there was a muffled scream of pain. The hand released
Langdon’s neck, twisting and jerking away into the dark. When the killer finally pulled his arm
free, the casket fell with a conclusive thud against the flat marble floor.
Complete darkness. Again.
And silence.
There was no frustrated pounding outside the overturned sarcophagus. No prying to get in.
Nothing. As Langdon lay in the dark amidst a pile of bones, he fought the closing darkness and
turned his thoughts to her.
Vittoria. Are you alive?
If Langdon had known the truth–the horror to which Vittoria would soon awake–he would
have wished for her sake that she were dead.
94
Sitting in the Sistine Chapel among his stunned colleagues, Cardinal Mortati tried to
comprehend the words he was hearing. Before him, lit only by the candlelight, the camerlegno had
just told a tale of such hatred and treachery that Mortati found himself trembling. The camerlegno
spoke of kidnapped cardinals, branded cardinals, murdered cardinals. He spoke of the ancient
Illuminati–a name that dredged up forgotten fears–and of their resurgence and vow of revenge
against the church. With pain in his voice, the camerlegno spoke of his late Pope… the victim of an
Illuminati poisoning. And finally, his words almost a whisper, he spoke of a deadly new
technology, antimatter, which in less than two hours threatened to destroy all of Vatican City.
When he was through, it was as if Satan himself had sucked the air from the room. Nobody
could move. The camerlegno’s words hung in the darkness.
The only sound Mortati could now hear was the anomalous hum of a television camera in
back–an electronic presence no conclave in history had ever endured–but a presence demanded by
the camerlegno. To the utter astonishment of the cardinals, the camerlegno had entered the Sistine
Chapel with two BBC reporters–a man and a woman–and announced that they would be
transmitting his solemn statement, live to the world.
Now, speaking directly to the camera, the camerlegno stepped forward. “To the Illuminati,”
he said, his voice deepening, “and to those of science, let me say this.” He paused. “You have won
the war.”
The silence spread now to the deepest corners of the chapel. Mortati could hear the desperate
thumping of his own heart.
“The wheels have been in motion for a long time,” the camerlegno said. “Your victory has
been inevitable. Never before has it been as obvious as it is at this moment. Science is the new
God.”
What is he saying? Mortati thought. Has he gone mad? The entire world is hearing this!
“Medicine, electronic communications, space travel, genetic manipulation… these are the
miracles about which we now tell our children. These are the miracles we herald as proof that
science will bring us the answers. The ancient stories of immaculate conceptions, burning bushes,
and parting seas are no longer relevant. God has become obsolete. Science has won the battle. We
concede.”
A rustle of confusion and bewilderment swept through the chapel.
“But science’s victory,” the camerlegno added, his voice intensifying, “has cost every one of
us. And it has cost us deeply.”
Silence.
“Science may have alleviated the miseries of disease and drudgery and provided an array of
gadgetry for our entertainment and convenience, but it has left us in a world without wonder. Our
sunsets have been reduced to wavelengths and frequencies. The complexities of the universe have
been shredded into mathematical equations. Even our self-worth as human beings has been
destroyed. Science proclaims that Planet Earth and its inhabitants are a meaningless speck in the
grand scheme. A cosmic accident.” He paused. “Even the technology that promises to unite us,
divides us. Each of us is now electronically connected to the globe, and yet we feel utterly alone.
We are bombarded with violence, division, fracture, and betrayal. Skepticism has become a virtue.
Cynicism and demand for proof has become enlightened thought. Is it any wonder that humans now
feel more depressed and defeated than they have at any point in human history? Does science hold
anything sacred? Science looks for answers by probing our unborn fetuses. Science even presumes
to rearrange our own DNA. It shatters God’s world into smaller and smaller pieces in quest of
meaning… and all it finds is more questions.”
Mortati watched in awe. The camerlegno was almost hypnotic now. He had a physical
strength in his movements and voice that Mortati had never witnessed on a Vatican altar. The man’s
voice was wrought with conviction and sadness.
“The ancient war between science and religion is over,” the camerlegno said. “You have won.
But you have not won fairly. You have not won by providing answers. You have won by so
radically reorienting our society that the truths we once saw as signposts now seem inapplicable.
Religion cannot keep up. Scientific growth is exponential. It feeds on itself like a virus. Every new
breakthrough opens doors for new breakthroughs. Mankind took thousands of years to progress
from the wheel to the car. Yet only decades from the car into space. Now we measure scientific
progress in weeks. We are spinning out of control. The rift between us grows deeper and deeper,
and as religion is left behind, people find themselves in a spiritual void. We cry out for meaning.
And believe me, we do cry out. We see UFOs, engage in channeling, spirit contact, out-of-body
experiences, mindquests–all these eccentric ideas have a scientific veneer, but they are unashamedly
irrational. They are the desperate cry of the modern soul, lonely and tormented, crippled by its own
enlightenment and its inability to accept meaning in anything removed from technology.”
Mortati could feel himself leaning forward in his seat. He and the other cardinals and people
around the world were hanging on this priest’s every utterance. The camerlegno spoke with no
rhetoric or vitriol. No references to scripture or Jesus Christ. He spoke in modern terms, unadorned
and pure. Somehow, as though the words were flowing from God himself, he spoke the modern
language… delivering the ancient message. In that moment, Mortati saw one of the reasons the late
Pope held this young man so dear. In a world of apathy, cynicism, and technological deification,
men like the camerlegno, realists who could speak to our souls like this man just had, were the
church’s only hope.
The camerlegno was talking more forcefully now. “Science, you say, will save us. Science, I
say, has destroyed us. Since the days of Galileo, the church has tried to slow the relentless march of
science, sometimes with misguided means, but always with benevolent intention. Even so, the
temptations are too great for man to resist. I warn you, look around yourselves. The promises of
science have not been kept. Promises of efficiency and simplicity have bred nothing but pollution
and chaos. We are a fractured and frantic species… moving down a path of destruction.”
The camerlegno paused a long moment and then sharpened his eyes on the camera.
“Who is this God science? Who is the God who offers his people power but no moral
framework to tell you how to use that power? What kind of God gives a child fire but does not
warn the child of its dangers? The language of science comes with no signposts about good and bad.
Science textbooks tell us how to create a nuclear reaction, and yet they contain no chapter asking us
if it is a good or a bad idea.
“To science, I say this. The church is tired. We are exhausted from trying to be your
signposts. Our resources are drying up from our campaign to be the voice of balance as you plow
blindly on in your quest for smaller chips and larger profits. We ask not why you will not govern
yourselves, but how can you? Your world moves so fast that if you stop even for an instant to
consider the implications of your actions, someone more efficient will whip past you in a blur. So
you move on. You proliferate weapons of mass destruction, but it is the Pope who travels the world
beseeching leaders to use restraint. You clone living creatures, but it is the church reminding us to
consider the moral implications of our actions. You encourage people to interact on phones, video
screens, and computers, but it is the church who opens its doors and reminds us to commune in
person as we were meant to do. You even murder unborn babies in the name of research that will
save lives. Again, it is the church who points out the fallacy of this reasoning.
“And all the while, you proclaim the church is ignorant. But who is more ignorant? The man
who cannot define lightning, or the man who does not respect its awesome power? This church is
reaching out to you. Reaching out to everyone. And yet the more we reach, the more you push us
away. Show me proof there is a God, you say. I say use your telescopes to look to the heavens, and
tell me how there could not be a God!” The camerlegno had tears in his eyes now. “You ask what
does God look like. I say, where did that question come from? The answers are one and the same.
Do you not see God in your science? How can you miss Him! You proclaim that even the slightest
change in the force of gravity or the weight of an atom would have rendered our universe a lifeless
mist rather than our magnificent sea of heavenly bodies, and yet you fail to see God’s hand in this ?
Is it really so much easier to believe that we simply chose the right card from a deck of billions?
Have we become so spiritually bankrupt that we would rather believe in mathematical impossibility
than in a power greater than us?
“Whether or not you believe in God,” the camerlegno said, his voice deepening with
deliberation, “you must believe this. When we as a species abandon our trust in the power greater
than us, we abandon our sense of accountability. Faith… all faiths… are admonitions that there is
something we cannot understand, something to which we are accountable… With faith we are
accountable to each other, to ourselves, and to a higher truth. Religion is flawed, but only because
man is flawed. If the outside world could see this church as I do… looking beyond the ritual of
these walls… they would see a modern miracle… a brotherhood of imperfect, simple souls wanting
only to be a voice of compassion in a world spinning out of control.”
The camerlegno motioned out over the College of Cardinals, and the BBC camerawoman
instinctively followed, panning the crowd.
“Are we obsolete?” the camerlegno asked. “Are these men dino-saurs? Am I? Does the world
really need a voice for the poor, the weak, the oppressed, the unborn child? Do we really need souls
like these who, though imperfect, spend their lives imploring each of us to read the signposts of
morality and not lose our way?”
Mortati now realized that the camerlegno, whether consciously or not, was making a brilliant
move. By showing the cardinals, he was personalizing the church. Vatican City was no longer a
building, it was people –people like the camerlegno who had spent their lives in the service of
goodness.
“Tonight we are perched on a precipice,” the camerlegno said. “None of us can afford to be
apathetic. Whether you see this evil as Satan, corruption, or immorality… the dark force is alive and
growing every day. Do not ignore it.” The camerlegno lowered his voice to a whisper, and the
camera moved in. “The force, though mighty, is not invincible. Goodness can prevail. Listen to
your hearts. Listen to God. Together we can step back from this abyss.”
Now Mortati understood. This was the reason. Conclave had been violated, but this was the
only way. It was a dramatic and desperate plea for help. The camerlegno was speaking to both his
enemy and his friends now. He was entreating anyone, friend or foe, to see the light and stop this
madness. Certainly someone listening would realize the insanity of this plot and come forward.
The camerlegno knelt at the altar. “Pray with me.”
The College of Cardinals dropped to their knees to join him in prayer. Outside in St. Peter’s
Square and around the globe… a stunned world knelt with them.
95
The Hassassin lay his unconscious trophy in the rear of the van and took a moment to admire
her sprawled body. She was not as beautiful as the women he bought, and yet she had an animal
strength that excited him. Her body was radiant, dewy with perspiration. She smelled of musk.
As the Hassasin stood there savoring his prize, he ignored the throb in his arm. The bruise
from the falling sarcophagus, although painful, was insignificant… well worth the compensation
that lay before him. He took consolation in knowing the American who had done this to him was
probably dead by now.
Gazing down at his incapacitated prisoner, the Hassassin visualized what lay ahead. He ran a
palm up beneath her shirt. Her breasts felt perfect beneath her bra. Yes , he smiled. You are more
than worthy . Fighting the urge to take her right there, he closed the door and drove off into the
night.
There was no need to alert the press about this killing… the flames would do that for him.
At CERN, Sylvie sat stunned by the camerlegno’s address. Never before had she felt so proud
to be a Catholic and so ashamed to work at CERN. As she left the recreational wing, the mood in
every single viewing room was dazed and somber. When she got back to Kohler’s office, all seven
phone lines were ringing. Media inquiries were never routed to Kohler’s office, so the incoming
calls could only be one thing.
Geld . Money calls.
Antimatter technology already had some takers.
Inside the Vatican, Gunther Glick was walking on air as he followed the camerlegno from the
Sistine Chapel. Glick and Macri had just made the live transmission of the decade. And what a
transmission it had been. The camerlegno had been spellbinding.
Now out in the hallway, the camerlegno turned to Glick and Macri. “I have asked the Swiss
Guard to assemble photos for you–photos of the branded cardinals as well as one of His late
Holiness. I must warn you, these are not pleasant pictures. Ghastly burns. Blackened tongues. But I
would like you to broadcast them to the world.”
Glick decided it must be perpetual Christmas inside Vatican City. He wants me to broadcast
an exclusive photo of the dead Pope? “Are you sure?” Glick asked, trying to keep the excitement
from his voice.
The camerlegno nodded. “The Swiss Guard will also provide you a live video feed of the
antimatter canister as it counts down.”
Glick stared. Christmas. Christmas. Christmas!
“The Illuminati are about to find out,” the camerlegno declared, “that they have grossly
overplayed their hand.”
96
Like a recurring theme in some demonic symphony, the suffocating darkness had returned.
No light. No air. No exit .
Langdon lay trapped beneath the overturned sarcophagus and felt his mind careening
dangerously close to the brink. Trying to drive his thoughts in any direction other than the crushing
space around him, Langdon urged his mind toward some logical process… mathematics, music,
anything. But there was no room for calming thoughts. I can’t move! I can’t breathe!
The pinched sleeve of his jacket had thankfully come free when the casket fell, leaving
Langdon now with two mobile arms. Even so, as he pressed upward on the ceiling of his tiny cell,
he found it immovable. Oddly, he wished his sleeve were still caught. At least it might create a
crack for some air .
As Langdon pushed against the roof above, his sleeve fell back to reveal the faint glow of an
old friend. Mickey. The greenish cartoon face seemed mocking now.
Langdon probed the blackness for any other sign of light, but the casket rim was flush against
the floor. Goddamn Italian perfectionists, he cursed, now imperiled by the same artistic excellence
he taught his students to revere… impeccable edges, faultless parallels, and of course, use only of
the most seamless and resilient Carrara marble.
Precision can be suffocating.
“Lift the damn thing,” he said aloud, pressing harder through the tangle of bones. The box
shifted slightly. Setting his jaw, he heaved again. The box felt like a boulder, but this time it raised a
quarter of an inch. A fleeting glimmer of light surrounded him, and then the casket thudded back
down. Langdon lay panting in the dark. He tried to use his legs to lift as he had before, but now that
the sarcophagus had fallen flat, there was no room even to straighten his knees.
As the claustrophobic panic closed in, Langdon was overcome by images of the sarcophagus
shrinking around him. Squeezed by delirium, he fought the illusion with every logical shred of
intellect he had.
“Sarcophagus,” he stated aloud, with as much academic sterility as he could muster. But even
erudition seemed to be his enemy today. Sarcophagus is from the Greek “sarx” meaning “flesh,”
and “phagein” meaning “to eat.” I’m trapped in a box literally designed to “eat flesh .”
Images of flesh eaten from bone only served as a grim reminder that Langdon lay covered in
human remains. The notion brought nausea and chills. But it also brought an idea.
Fumbling blindly around the coffin, Langdon found a shard of bone. A rib maybe? He didn’t
care. All he wanted was a wedge. If he could lift the box, even a crack, and slide the bone fragment
beneath the rim, then maybe enough air could…
Reaching across his body and wedging the tapered end of the bone into the crack between the
floor and the coffin, Langdon reached up with his other hand and heaved skyward. The box did not
move. Not even slightly. He tried again. For a moment, it seemed to tremble slightly, but that was
all.
With the fetid stench and lack of oxygen choking the strength from his body, Langdon
realized he only had time for one more effort. He also knew he would need both arms.
Regrouping, he placed the tapered edge of the bone against the crack, and shifting his body,
he wedged the bone against his shoulder, pinning it in place. Careful not to dislodge it, he raised
both hands above him. As the stifling confine began to smother him, he felt a welling of intensified
panic. It was the second time today he had been trapped with no air. Hollering aloud, Langdon
thrust upward in one explosive motion. The casket jostled off the floor for an instant. But long
enough. The bone shard he had braced against his shoulder slipped outward into the widening
crack. When the casket fell again, the bone shattered. But this time Langdon could see the casket
was propped up. A tiny slit of light showed beneath the rim.
Exhausted, Langdon collapsed. Hoping the strangling sensation in his throat would pass, he
waited. But it only worsened as the seconds passed. Whatever air was coming through the slit
seemed imperceptible. Langdon wondered if it would be enough to keep him alive. And if so, for
how long? If he passed out, who would know he was even in there?
With arms like lead, Langdon raised his watch again: 10:12 P.M. Fighting trembling fingers,
he fumbled with the watch and made his final play. He twisted one of the tiny dials and pressed a
button.
As consciousness faded, and the walls squeezed closer, Langdon felt the old fears sweep over
him. He tried to imagine, as he had so many times, that he was in an open field. The image he
conjured, however, was no help. The nightmare that had haunted him since his youth came crashing
back…
The flowers here are like paintings, the child thought, laughing as he ran across the
meadow. He wished his parents had come along. But his parents were busy pitching
camp.
“Don’t explore too far,” his mother had said.
He had pretended not to hear as he bounded off into the woods.
Now, traversing this glorious field, the boy came across a pile of fieldstones. He
figured it must be the foundation of an old homestead. He would not go near it. He knew
better. Besides, his eyes had been drawn to something else–a brilliant lady’s slipper–the
rarest and most beautiful flower in New Hampshire. He had only ever seen them in
books.
Excited, the boy moved toward the flower. He knelt down. The ground beneath
him felt mulchy and hollow. He realized his flower had found an extra-fertile spot. It was
growing from a patch of rotting wood.
Thrilled by the thought of taking home his prize, the boy reached out… fingers
extending toward the stem.
He never reached it.
With a sickening crack, the earth gave way.
In the three seconds of dizzying terror as he fell, the boy knew he would die.
Plummeting downward, he braced for the bone-crushing collision. When it came, there
was no pain. Only softness.
And cold.
He hit the deep liquid face first, plunging into a narrow blackness. Spinning
disoriented somersaults, he groped the sheer walls thatenclosed him on all sides.
Somehow, as if by instinct, he sputtered to the surface.
Light.
Faint. Above him. Miles above him, it seemed.
His arms clawed at the water, searching the walls of the hollow for something to
grab onto. Only smooth stone. He had fallen through an abandoned well covering. He
screamed for help, but his cries reverberated in the tight shaft. He called out again and
again. Above him, the tattered hole grew dim.
Night fell.
Time seemed to contort in the darkness. Numbness set in as he treaded water in the
depths of the chasm, calling, crying out. He was tormented by visions of the walls
collapsing in, burying him alive. His arms ached with fatigue. A few times he thought he
heard voices. He shouted out, but his own voice was muted… like a dream.
As the night wore on, the shaft deepened. The walls inched quietly inward. The
boy pressed out against the enclosure, pushing it away. Exhausted, he wanted to give up.
And yet he felt the water buoy him, cooling his burning fears until he was numb.
When the rescue team arrived, they found the boy barely conscious. He had been
treading water for five hours. Two days later, the Boston Globe ran a front-page story
called “The Little Swimmer That Could.”
97
The Hassassin smiled as he pulled his van into the mammoth stone structure overlooking the
Tiber River. He carried his prize up and up… spiraling higher in the stone tunnel, grateful his load
was slender.
He arrived at the door.
The Church of Illumination, he gloated. The ancient Illuminati meeting room. Who would
have imagined it to be here?
Inside, he lay her on a plush divan. Then he expertly bound her arms behind her back and tied
her feet. He knew that what he longed for would have to wait until his final task was finished.
Water .
Still, he thought, he had a moment for indulgence. Kneeling beside her, he ran his hand along
her thigh. It was smooth. Higher. His dark fingers snaked beneath the cuff of her shorts. Higher.
He stopped. Patience , he told himself, feeling aroused. There is work to be done .
He walked for a moment out onto the chamber’s high stone balcony. The evening breeze
slowly cooled his ardor. Far below the Tiber raged. He raised his eyes to the dome of St. Peter’s,
three quarters of a mile away, naked under the glare of hundreds of press lights.
“Your final hour,” he said aloud, picturing the thousands of Muslims slaughtered during the
Crusades. “At midnight you will meet your God.”
Behind him, the woman stirred. The Hassassin turned. He considered letting her wake up.
Seeing terror in a woman’s eyes was his ultimate aphrodisiac.
He opted for prudence. It would be better if she remained unconscious while he was gone.
Although she was tied and would never escape, the Hassassin did not want to return and find her
exhausted from struggling. I want your strength preserved… for me .
Lifting her head slightly, he placed his palm beneath her neck and found the hollow directly
beneath her skull. The crown/meridian pressure point was one he had used countless times. With
crushing force, he drove his thumb into the soft cartilage and felt it depress. The woman slumped
instantly. Twenty minutes , he thought. She would be a tantalizing end to a perfect day. After she
had served him and died doing it, he would stand on the balcony and watch the midnight Vatican
fireworks.
Leaving his prize unconscious on the couch, the Hassassin went downstairs into a torchlit
dungeon. The final task. He walked to the table and revered the sacred, metal forms that had been
left there for him.
Water . It was his last.
Removing a torch from the wall as he had done three times already, he began heating the end.
When the end of the object was white hot, he carried it to the cell.
Inside, a single man stood in silence. Old and alone.
“Cardinal Baggia,” the killer hissed. “Have you prayed yet?”
The Italian’s eyes were fearless. “Only for your soul.”
98
The six pompieri firemen who responded to the fire at the Church of Santa Maria Della
Vittoria extinguished the bonfire with blasts of Halon gas. Water was cheaper, but the steam it
created would have ruined the frescoes in the chapel, and the Vatican paid Roman pompieri a
healthy stipend for swift and prudent service in all Vatican-owned buildings.
Pompieri , by the nature of their work, witnessed tragedy almost daily, but the execution in
this church was something none of them would ever forget. Part crucifixion, part hanging, part
burning at the stake, the scene was something dredged from a Gothic nightmare.
Unfortunately, the press, as usual, had arrived before the fire department. They’d shot plenty
of video before the pompieri cleared the church. When the firemen finally cut the victim down and
lay him on the floor, there was no doubt who the man was.
“Cardinale Guidera ,” one whispered. “Di Barcellona .”
The victim was nude. The lower half of his body was crimson-black, blood oozing through
gaping cracks in his thighs. His shinbones were exposed. One fireman vomited. Another went
outside to breathe.
The true horror, though, was the symbol seared on the cardinal’s chest. The squad chief
circled the corpse in awestruck dread. Lavoro del diavolo , he said to himself. Satan himself did this
. He crossed himself for the first time since childhood.
“Un’ altro corpo!” someone yelled. One of the firemen had found another body.
The second victim was a man the chief recognized immediately. The austere commander of
the Swiss Guard was a man for whom few public law enforcement officials had any affection. The
chief called the Vatican, but all the circuits were busy. He knew it didn’t matter. The Swiss Guard
would hear about this on television in a matter of minutes.
As the chief surveyed the damage, trying to recreate what possibly could have gone on here,
he saw a niche riddled with bullet holes. A coffin had been rolled off its supports and fallen upside
down in an apparent struggle. It was a mess. That’s for the police and Holy See to deal with , the
chief thought, turning away.
As he turned, though, he stopped. Coming from the coffin he heard a sound. It was not a
sound any fireman ever liked to hear.
“Bomba!” he cried out. “Tutti fuori! ”
When the bomb squad rolled the coffin over, they discovered the source of the electronic
beeping. They stared, confused.
“Mèdico!” one finally screamed. “Mèdico! ”
99
“Any word from Olivetti?” the camerlegno asked, looking drained as Rocher escorted him
back from the Sistine Chapel to the Pope’s office.
“No, signore. I am fearing the worst.”
When they reached the Pope’s office, the camerlegno’s voice was heavy. “Captain, there is
nothing more I can do here tonight. I fear I have done too much already. I am going into this office
to pray. I do not wish to be disturbed. The rest is in God’s hands.”
“Yes, signore.”
“The hour is late, Captain. Find that canister.”
“Our search continues.” Rocher hesitated. “The weapon proves to be too well hidden.”
The camerlegno winced, as if he could not think of it. “Yes. At exactly 11:15 P.M., if the
church is still in peril, I want you to evacuate the cardinals. I am putting their safety in your hands. I
ask only one thing. Let these men proceed from this place with dignity. Let them exit into St.
Peter’s Square and stand side by side with the rest of the world. I do not want the last image of this
church to be frightened old men sneaking out a back door.”
“Very good, signore. And you? Shall I come for you at 11:15 as well?”
“There will be no need.”
“Signore?”
“I will leave when the spirit moves me.”
Rocher wondered if the camerlegno intended to go down with the ship.
The camerlegno opened the door to the Pope’s office and entered. “Actually…” he said,
turning. “There is one thing.”
“Signore?”
“There seems to be a chill in this office tonight. I am trembling.”
“The electric heat is out. Let me lay you a fire.”
The camerlegno smiled tiredly. “Thank you. Thank you, very much.”
Rocher exited the Pope’s office where he had left the camerlegno praying by firelight in front
of a small statue of the Blessed Mother Mary. It was an eerie sight. A black shadow kneeling in the
flickering glow. As Rocher headed down the hall, a guard appeared, running toward him. Even by
candlelight Rocher recognized Lieutenant Chartrand. Young, green, and eager.
“Captain,” Chartrand called, holding out a cellular phone. “I think the camerlegno’s address
may have worked. We’ve got a caller here who says he has information that can help us. He phoned
on one of the Vatican’s private extensions. I have no idea how he got the number.”
Rocher stopped. “What?”
“He will only speak to the ranking officer.”
“Any word from Olivetti?”
“No, sir.”
He took the receiver. “This is Captain Rocher. I am ranking officer here.”
“Rocher,” the voice said. “I will explain to you who I am. Then I will tell you what you are
going to do next.”
When the caller stopped talking and hung up, Rocher stood stunned. He now knew from
whom he was taking orders.
Back at CERN, Sylvie Baudeloque was frantically trying to keep track of all the licensing
inquiries coming in on Kohler’s voice mail. When the private line on the director’s desk began to
ring, Sylvie jumped. Nobody had that number. She answered.
“Yes?”
“Ms. Baudeloque? This is Director Kohler. Contact my pilot. My jet is to be ready in five
minutes.”
100
Robert Langdon had no idea where he was or how long he had been unconscious when he
opened his eyes and found himself staring up at the underside of a baroque, frescoed cupola. Smoke
drifted overhead. Something was covering his mouth. An oxygen mask. He pulled it off. There was
a terrible smell in the room–like burning flesh.
Langdon winced at the pounding in his head. He tried to sit up. A man in white was kneeling
beside him.
“Riposati!” the man said, easing Langdon onto his back again. “Sono il paramédico .”
Langdon succumbed, his head spiraling like the smoke overhead. What the hell happened?
Wispy feelings of panic sifted through his mind.
“Sórcio salvatore ,” the paramedic said. “Mouse… savior.”
Langdon felt even more lost. Mouse savior?
The man motioned to the Mickey Mouse watch on Langdon’s wrist. Langdon’s thoughts
began to clear. He remembered setting the alarm. As he stared absently at the watch face, Langdon
also noted the hour. 10:28 P.M.
He sat bolt upright.
Then, it all came back.
Langdon stood near the main altar with the fire chief and a few of his men. They had been
rattling him with questions. Langdon wasn’t listening. He had questions of his own. His whole body
ached, but he knew he needed to act immediately.
A pompiero approached Langdon across the church. “I checked again, sir. The only bodies
we found are Cardinal Guidera and the Swiss Guard commander. There’s no sign of a woman
here.”
“Grazie ,” Langdon said, unsure whether he was relieved or horrified. He knew he had seen
Vittoria unconscious on the floor. Now she was gone. The only explanation he came up with was
not a comforting one. The killer had not been subtle on the phone. A woman of spirit. I am aroused.
Perhaps before this night is over, I will find you. And when I do… ”
Langdon looked around. “Where is the Swiss Guard?”
“Still no contact. Vatican lines are jammed.”
Langdon felt overwhelmed and alone. Olivetti was dead. The cardinal was dead. Vittoria was
missing. A half hour of his life had disappeared in a blink.
Outside, Langdon could hear the press swarming. He suspected footage of the third cardinal’s
horrific death would no doubt air soon, if it hadn’t already. Langdon hoped the camerlegno had long
since assumed the worst and taken action. Evacuate the damn Vatican! Enough games! We lose!
Langdon suddenly realized that all of the catalysts that had been driving him–helping to save
Vatican City, rescuing the four cardinals, coming face to face with the brotherhood he had studied
for years–all of these things had evaporated from his mind. The war was lost. A new compulsion
had ignited within him. It was simple. Stark. Primal.
Find Vittoria.
He felt an unexpected emptiness inside. Langdon had often heard that intense situations could
unite two people in ways that decades together often did not. He now believed it. In Vittoria’s
absence he felt something he had not felt in years. Loneliness. The pain gave him strength.
Pushing all else from his mind, Langdon mustered his concentration. He prayed that the
Hassassin would take care of business before pleasure. Otherwise, Langdon knew he was already
too late. No , he told himself, you have time . Vittoria’s captor still had work to do. He had to
surface one last time before disappearing forever.
The last altar of science , Langdon thought. The killer had one final task. Earth. Air. Fire.
Water .
He looked at his watch. Thirty minutes. Langdon moved past the firemen toward Bernini’s
Ecstasy of St. Teresa . This time, as he stared at Bernini’s marker, Langdon had no doubt what he
was looking for.
Let angels guide you on your lofty quest…
Directly over the recumbent saint, against a backdrop of gilded flame, hovered Bernini’s
angel. The angel’s hand clutched a pointed spear of fire. Langdon’s eyes followed the direction of
the shaft, arching toward the right side of the church. His eyes hit the wall. He scanned the spot
where the spear was pointing. There was nothing there. Langdon knew, of course, the spear was
pointing far beyond the wall, into the night, somewhere across Rome.
“What direction is that?” Langdon asked, turning and addressing the chief with a newfound
determination.
“Direction?” The chief glanced where Langdon was pointing. He sounded confused. “I don’t
know… west, I think.”
“What churches are in that direction?”
The chief’s puzzlement seemed to deepen. “Dozens. Why?”
Langdon frowned. Of course there were dozens. “I need a city map. Right away.”
The chief sent someone running out to the fire truck for a map. Langdon turned back to the
statue. Earth… Air… Fire… VITTORIA .
The final marker is Water , he told himself. Bernini’s Water . It was in a church out there
somewhere. A needle in a haystack. He spurred his mind through all the Bernini works he could
recall. I need a tribute to Water!
Langdon flashed on Bernini’s statue of Triton –the Greek God of the sea. Then he realized it
was located in the square outside this very church, in entirely the wrong direction. He forced
himself to think. What figure would Bernini have carved as a glorification of water? Neptune and
Apollo? Unfortunately that statue was in London’s Victoria & Albert Museum.
“Signore?” A fireman ran in with a map.
Langdon thanked him and spread it out on the altar. He immediately realized he had asked the
right people; the fire department’s map of Rome was as detailed as any Langdon had ever seen.
“Where are we now?”
The man pointed. “Next to Piazza Barberini.”
Langdon looked at the angel’s spear again to get his bearings. The chief had estimated
correctly. According to the map, the spear was pointing west. Langdon traced a line from his
current location west across the map. Almost instantly his hopes began to sink. It seemed that with
every inch his finger traveled, he passed yet another building marked by a tiny black cross.
Churches . The city was riddled with them. Finally, Langdon’s finger ran out of churches and
trailed off into the suburbs of Rome. He exhaled and stepped back from the map. Damn .
Surveying the whole of Rome, Langdon’s eyes touched down on the three churches where the
first three cardinals had been killed. The Chigi Chapel… St. Peter’s… here…
Seeing them all laid out before him now, Langdon noted an oddity in their locations.
Somehow he had imagined the churches would be scattered randomly across Rome. But they most
definitely were not. Improbably, the three churches seemed to be separated systematically, in an
enormous city-wide triangle. Langdon double-checked. He was not imagining things. “Penna ,” he
said suddenly, without looking up.
Someone handed him a ballpoint pen.
Langdon circled the three churches. His pulse quickened. He triple-checked his markings. A
symmetrical triangle!
Langdon’s first thought was for the Great Seal on the one-dollar bill–the triangle containing
the all-seeing eye. But it didn’t make sense. He had marked only three points. There were
supposed to be four in all.
So where the hell is Water? Langdon knew that anywhere he placed the fourth point, the
triangle would be destroyed. The only option to retain the symmetry was to place the fourth marker
inside the triangle, at the center. He looked at the spot on the map. Nothing. The idea bothered him
anyway. The four elements of science were considered equal . Water was not special; Water would
not be at the center of the others.
Still, his instinct told him the systematic arrangement could not possibly be accidental. I’m
not yet seeing the whole picture . There was only one alternative. The four points did not make a
triangle; they made some other shape.
Langdon looked at the map. A square, perhaps? Although a square made no symbolic sense,
squares were symmetrical at least. Langdon put his finger on the map at one of the points that
would turn the triangle into a square. He saw immediately that a perfect square was impossible. The
angles of the original triangle were oblique and created more of a distorted quadrilateral.
As he studied the other possible points around the triangle, something unexpected happened.
He noticed that the line he had drawn earlier to indicate the direction of the angel’s spear passed
perfectly through one of the possibilities. Stupefied, Langdon circled that point. He was now
looking at four ink marks on the map, arranged in somewhat of an awkward, kitelike diamond.
He frowned. Diamonds were not an Illuminati symbol either. He paused. Then again…
For an instant Langdon flashed on the famed Illuminati Diamond. The thought, of course, was
ridiculous. He dismissed it. Besides, this diamond was oblong–like a kite–hardly an example of the
flawless symmetry for which the Illuminati Diamond was revered.
When he leaned in to examine where he had placed the final mark, Langdon was surprised to
find that the fourth point lay dead center of Rome’s famed Piazza Navona. He knew the piazza
contained a major church, but he had already traced his finger through that piazza and considered
the church there. To the best of his knowledge it contained no Bernini works. The church was called
Saint Agnes in Agony, named for St. Agnes, a ravishing teenage virgin banished to a life of sexual
slavery for refusing to renounce her faith.
There must be something in that church! Langdon racked his brain, picturing the inside of
the church. He could think of no Bernini works at all inside, much less anything to do with water .
The arrangement on the map was bothering him too. A diamond. It was far too accurate to be
coincidence, but it was not accurate enough to make any sense. A kite? Langdon wondered if he
had chosen the wrong point. What am I missing!
The answer took another thirty seconds to hit him, but when it did, Langdon felt an
exhilaration like nothing he had ever experienced in his academic career.
The Illuminati genius, it seemed, would never cease.
The shape he was looking at was not intended as a diamond at all. The four points only
formed a diamond because Langdon had connected adjacent points. The Illuminati believe in
opposites! Connecting opposite vertices with his pen, Langdon’s fingers were trembling. There
before him on the map was a giant cruciform. It’s a cross! The four elements of science unfolded
before his eyes… sprawled across Rome in an enormous, city-wide cross.
As he stared in wonder, a line of poetry rang in his mind… like an old friend with a new face.
’Cross Rome the mystic elements unfold…
’Cross Rome…
The fog began to clear. Langdon saw that the answer had been in front of him all night! The
Illuminati poem had been telling him how the altars were laid out. A cross!
’Cross Rome the mystic elements unfold!
It was cunning wordplay. Langdon had originally read the word’Cross as an abbreviation of
Across . He assumed it was poetic license intended to retain the meter of the poem. But it was so
much more than that! Another hidden clue.
The cruciform on the map, Langdon realized, was the ultimate Illuminati duality. It was a
religious symbol formed by elements of science. Galileo’s path of Illumination was a tribute to both
science and God!
The rest of the puzzle fell into place almost immediately.
Piazza Navona .
Dead center of Piazza Navona, outside the church of St. Agnes in Agony, Bernini had forged
one of his most celebrated sculptures. Everyone who came to Rome went to see it.
The Fountain of the Four Rivers!
A flawless tribute to water, Bernini’s Fountain of the Four Rivers glorified the four major
rivers of the Old World–The Nile, Ganges, Danube, and Rio Plata.
Water , Langdon thought. The final marker . It was perfect.
And even more perfect, Langdon realized, the cherry on the cake, was that high atop Bernini’s
fountain stood a towering obelisk.
Leaving confused firemen in his wake, Langdon ran across the church in the direction of
Olivetti’s lifeless body.
10:31 P.M ., he thought. Plenty of time . It was the first instant all day that Langdon felt ahead
of the game.
Kneeling beside Olivetti, out of sight behind some pews, Langdon discreetly took possession
of the commander’s semiautomatic and walkie-talkie. Langdon knew he would call for help, but
this was not the place to do it. The final altar of science needed to remain a secret for now. The
media and fire department racing with sirens blaring to Piazza Navona would be no help at all.
Without a word, Langdon slipped out the door and skirted the press, who were now entering
the church in droves. He crossed Piazza Barberini. In the shadows he turned on the walkie-talkie.
He tried to hail Vatican City but heard nothing but static. He was either out of range or the
transmitter needed some kind of authorization code. Langdon adjusted the complex dials and
buttons to no avail. Abruptly, he realized his plan to get help was not going to work. He spun,
looking for a pay phone. None. Vatican circuits were jammed anyway.
He was alone.
Feeling his initial surge of confidence decay, Langdon stood a moment and took stock of his
pitiful state–covered in bone dust, cut, deliriously exhausted, and hungry.
Langdon glanced back at the church. Smoke spiraled over the cupola, lit by the media lights
and fire trucks. He wondered if he should go back and get help. Instinct warned him however that
extra help, especially untrained help, would be nothing but a liability. If the Hassassin sees us
coming… He thought of Vittoria and knew this would be his final chance to face her captor.
Piazza Navona , he thought, knowing he could get there in plenty of time and stake it out. He
scanned the area for a taxi, but the streets were almost entirely deserted. Even the taxi drivers, it
seemed, had dropped everything to find a television. Piazza Navona was only about a mile away,
but Langdon had no intention of wasting precious energy on foot. He glanced back at the church,
wondering if he could borrow a vehicle from someone.
A fire truck? A press van? Be serious .
Sensing options and minutes slipping away, Langdon made his decision. Pulling the gun from
his pocket, he committed an act so out of character that he suspected his soul must now be
possessed. Running over to a lone Citroën sedan idling at a stoplight, Langdon pointed the weapon
through the driver’s open window. “Fuori!” he yelled.
The trembling man got out.
Langdon jumped behind the wheel and hit the gas.
101
Gunther Glick sat on a bench in a holding tank inside the office of the Swiss Guard. He
prayed to every god he could think of. Please let this NOT be a dream . It had been the scoop of his
life. The scoop of anyone’s life. Every reporter on earth wished he were Glick right now. You are
awake , he told himself. And you are a star. Dan Rather is crying right now .
Macri was beside him, looking a little bit stunned. Glick didn’t blame her. In addition to
exclusively broadcasting the camerlegno’s address, she and Glick had provided the world with
gruesome photos of the cardinals and of the Pope–that tongue !–as well as a live video feed of the
antimatter canister counting down. Incredible!
Of course, all of that had all been at the camerlegno’s behest, so that was not the reason Glick
and Macri were now locked in a Swiss Guard holding tank. It had been Glick’s daring addendum to
their coverage that the guards had not appreciated. Glick knew the conversation on which he had
just reported was not intended for his ears, but this was his moment in the sun. Another Glick scoop
!
“The 11th Hour Samaritan?” Macri groaned on the bench beside him, clearly unimpressed.
Glick smiled. “Brilliant, wasn’t it?”
“Brilliantly dumb.”
She’s just jealous , Glick knew. Shortly after the camerlegno’s address, Glick had again, by
chance, been in the right place at the right time. He’d overheard Rocher giving new orders to his
men. Apparently Rocher had received a phone call from a mysterious individual who Rocher
claimed had critical information regarding the current crisis. Rocher was talking as if this man could
help them and was advising his guards to prepare for the guest’s arrival.
Although the information was clearly private, Glick had acted as any dedicated reporter
would–without honor. He’d found a dark corner, ordered Macri to fire up her remote camera, and
he’d reported the news.
“Shocking new developments in God’s city,” he had announced, squinting his eyes for added
intensity. Then he’d gone on to say that a mystery guest was coming to Vatican City to save the
day. The 11th Hour Samaritan , Glick had called him–a perfect name for the faceless man
appearing at the last moment to do a good deed. The other networks had picked up the catchy sound
bite, and Glick was yet again immortalized.
I’m brilliant , he mused. Peter Jennings just jumped off a bridge .
Of course Glick had not stopped there. While he had the world’s attention, he had thrown in a
little of his own conspiracy theory for good measure.
Brilliant. Utterly brilliant .
“You screwed us,” Macri said. “You totally blew it.”
“What do you mean? I was great!”
Macri stared disbelievingly. “Former President George Bush? An Illuminatus?”
Glick smiled. How much more obvious could it be? George Bush was a well-documented,
33rd-degree Mason, and he was the head of the CIA when the agency closed their Illuminati
investigation for lack of evidence. And all those speeches about “a thousand points of light” and a
“New World Order”… Bush was obviously Illuminati.
“And that bit about CERN?” Macri chided. “You are going to have a very big line of lawyers
outside your door tomorrow.”
“CERN? Oh come on! It’s so obvious! Think about it! The Illuminati disappear off the face of
the earth in the 1950s at about the same time CERN is founded . CERN is a haven for the most
enlightened people on earth. Tons of private funding. They build a weapon that can destroy the
church, and oops!… they lose it!”
“So you tell the world that CERN is the new home base of the Illuminati?”
“Obviously! Brotherhoods don’t just disappear. The Illuminati had to go somewhere . CERN
is a perfect place for them to hide. I’m not saying everyone at CERN is Illuminati. It’s probably like
a huge Masonic lodge, where most people are innocent, but the upper echelons–”
“Have you ever heard of slander, Glick? Liability?”
“Have you ever heard of real journalism!”
“Journalism? You were pulling bullshit out of thin air! I should have turned off the camera!
And what the hell was that crap about CERN’s corporate logo? Satanic symbology? Have you lost
your mind?”
Glick smiled. Macri’s jealousy was definitely showing. The CERN logo had been the most
brilliant coup of all. Ever since the camerlegno’s address, all the networks were talking about
CERN and antimatter. Some stations were showing the CERN corporate logo as a backdrop. The
logo seemed standard enough–two intersecting circles representing two particle accelerators, and
five tangential lines representing particle injection tubes. The whole world was staring at this logo,
but it had been Glick, a bit of a symbologist himself, who had first seen the Illuminati symbology
hidden in it.
“You’re not a symbologist,” Macri chided, “you’re just one lucky-ass reporter. You should
have left the symbology to the Harvard guy.”
“The Harvard guy missed it,” Glick said.
The Illuminati significance in this logo is so obvious!
He was beaming inside. Although CERN had lots of accelerators, their logo showed only two.
Two is the Illuminati number of duality . Although most accelerators had only one injection tube,
the logo showed five. Five is the number of the Illuminati pentagram . Then had come the coup–the
most brilliant point of all. Glick pointed out that the logo contained a large numeral “6–clearly
formed by one of the lines and circles–and when the logo was rotated, another six appeared… and
then another. The logo contained three sixes! 666! The devil’s number! The mark of the beast!
Glick was a genius.
Macri looked ready to slug him.
The jealousy would pass, Glick knew, his mind now wandering to another thought. If CERN
was Illuminati headquarters, was CERN where the Illuminati kept their infamous Illuminati
Diamond? Glick had read about it on the Internet–“a flawless diamond, born of the ancient elements
with such perfection that all those who saw it could only stand in wonder .”
Glick wondered if the secret whereabouts of the Illuminati Diamond might be yet another
mystery he could unveil tonight.
102
Piazza Navona. Fountain of the Four Rivers .
Nights in Rome, like those in the desert, can be surprisingly cool, even after a warm day.
Langdon was huddled now on the fringes of Piazza Navona, pulling his jacket around him. Like the
distant white noise of traffic, a cacophony of news reports echoed across the city. He checked his
watch. Fifteen minutes. He was grateful for a few moments of rest.
The piazza was deserted. Bernini’s masterful fountain sizzled before him with a fearful
sorcery. The foaming pool sent a magical mist upward, lit from beneath by underwater floodlights.
Langdon sensed a cool electricity in the air.
The fountain’s most arresting quality was its height. The central core alone was over twenty
feet tall–a rugged mountain of travertine marble riddled with caves and grottoes through which the
water churned. The entire mound was draped with pagan figures. Atop this stood an obelisk that
climbed another forty feet. Langdon let his eyes climb. On the obelisk’s tip, a faint shadow blotted
the sky, a lone pigeon perched silently.
A cross , Langdon thought, still amazed by the arrangement of the markers across Rome.
Bernini’s Fountain of the Four Rivers was the last altar of science. Only hours ago Langdon had
been standing in the Pantheon convinced the Path of Illumination had been broken and he would
never get this far. It had been a foolish blunder. In fact, the entire path was intact. Earth, Air, Fire,
Water . And Langdon had followed it… from beginning to end.
Not quite to the end , he reminded himself. The path had five stops, not four. This fourth
marker fountain somehow pointed to the ultimate destiny–the Illuminati’s sacred lair–the Church of
Illumination. Langdon wondered if the lair were still standing. He wondered if that was where the
Hassassin had taken Vittoria.
Langdon found his eyes probing the figures in the fountain, looking for any clue as to the
direction of the lair. Let angels guide you on your lofty quest . Almost immediately, though, he was
overcome by an unsettling awareness. This fountain contained no angels whatsoever. It certainly
contained none Langdon could see from where he was standing… and none he had ever seen in the
past. The Fountain of the Four Rivers was a pagan work. The carvings were all profane–humans,
animals, even an awkward armadillo. An angel here would stick out like a sore thumb.
Is this the wrong place? He considered the cruciform arrangement of the four obelisks. He
clenched his fists. This fountain is perfect .
It was only 10:46 P.M. when a black van emerged from the alleyway on the far side of the
piazza. Langdon would not have given it a second look except that the van drove with no
headlights. Like a shark patrolling a moonlit bay, the vehicle circled the perimeter of the piazza.
Langdon hunkered lower, crouched in the shadows beside the huge stairway leading up to the
Church of St. Agnes in Agony. He gazed out at the piazza, his pulse climbing.
After making two complete circuits, the van banked inward toward Bernini’s fountain. It
pulled abreast of the basin, moving laterally along the rim until its side was flush with the fountain.
Then it parked, its sliding door positioned only inches above the churning water.
Mist billowed.
Langdon felt an uneasy premonition. Had the Hassassin arrived early? Had he come in a van?
Langdon had imagined the killer escorting his last victim across the piazza on foot, like he had at St.
Peter’s, giving Langdon an open shot. But if the Hassassin had arrived in a van, the rules had just
changed.
Suddenly, the van’s side door slid open.
On the floor of the van, contorted in agony, lay a naked man. The man was wrapped in yards
of heavy chains. He thrashed against the iron links, but the chains were too heavy. One of the links
bisected the man’s mouth like a horse’s bit, stifling his cries for help. It was then that Langdon saw
the second figure, moving around behind the prisoner in the dark, as though making final
preparations.
Langdon knew he had only seconds to act.
Taking the gun, he slipped off his jacket and dropped it on the ground. He didn’t want the
added encumbrance of a tweed jacket, nor did he have any intention of taking Galileo’s Diagramma
anywhere near the water. The document would stay here where it was safe and dry.
Langdon scrambled to his right. Circling the perimeter of the fountain, he positioned himself
directly opposite the van. The fountain’s massive centerpiece obscured his view. Standing, he ran
directly toward the basin. He hoped the thundering water was drowning his footsteps. When he
reached the fountain, he climbed over the rim and dropped into the foaming pool.
The water was waist deep and like ice. Langdon grit his teeth and plowed through the water.
The bottom was slippery, made doubly treacherous by a stratum of coins thrown for good luck.
Langdon sensed he would need more than good luck. As the mist rose all around him, he wondered
if it was the cold or the fear that was causing the gun in his hand to shake.
He reached the interior of the fountain and circled back to his left. He waded hard, clinging to
the cover of the marble forms. Hiding himself behind the huge carved form of a horse, Langdon
peered out. The van was only fifteen feet away. The Hassassin was crouched on the floor of the van,
hands planted on the cardinal’s chain-clad body, preparing to roll him out the open door into the
fountain.
Waist-deep in water, Robert Langdon raised his gun and stepped out of the mist, feeling like
some sort of aquatic cowboy making a final stand. “Don’t move.” His voice was steadier than the
gun.
The Hassassin looked up. For a moment he seemed confused, as though he had seen a ghost.
Then his lips curled into an evil smile. He raised his arms in submission. “And so it goes.”
“Get out of the van.”
“You look wet.”
“You’re early.”
“I am eager to return to my prize.”
Langdon leveled the gun. “I won’t hesitate to shoot.”
“You’ve already hesitated.”
Langdon felt his finger tighten on the trigger. The cardinal lay motionless now. He looked
exhausted, moribund. “Untie him.”
“Forget him. You’ve come for the woman. Do not pretend otherwise.”
Langdon fought the urge to end it right there. “Where is she?”
“Somewhere safe. Awaiting my return.”
She’s alive . Langdon felt a ray of hope. “At the Church of Illumination?”
The killer smiled. “You will never find its location.”
Langdon was incredulous. The lair is still standing . He aimed the gun. “Where?”
“The location has remained secret for centuries. Even to me it was only revealed recently. I
would die before I break that trust.”
“I can find it without you.”
“An arrogant thought.”
Langdon motioned to the fountain. “I’ve come this far.”
“So have many. The final step is the hardest.”
Langdon stepped closer, his footing tentative beneath the water. The Hassassin looked
remarkably calm, squatting there in the back of the van with his arms raised over his head. Langdon
aimed at his chest, wondering if he should simply shoot and be done with it. No . He knows where
Vittoria is. He knows where the antimatter is. I need information!
From the darkness of the van the Hassassin gazed out at his aggressor and couldn’t help but
feel an amused pity. The American was brave, that he had proven. But he was also untrained. That
he had also proven. Valor without expertise was suicide. There were rules of survival. Ancient
rules. And the American was breaking all of them.
You had the advantage–the element of surprise. You squandered it .
The American was indecisive… hoping for backup most likely… or perhaps a slip of the
tongue that would reveal critical information.
Never interrogate before you disable your prey. A cornered enemy is a deadly enemy .
The American was talking again. Probing. Maneuvering.
The killer almost laughed aloud. This is not one of your Hollywood movies… there will be no
long discussions at gunpoint before the final shoot-out. This is the end. Now .
Without breaking eye contact, the killer inched his hands across the ceiling of the van until he
found what he was looking for. Staring dead ahead, he grasped it.
Then he made his play.
The motion was utterly unexpected. For an instant, Langdon thought the laws of physics had
ceased to exist. The killer seemed to hang weightless in the air as his legs shot out from beneath
him, his boots driving into the cardinal’s side and launching the chain-laden body out the door. The
cardinal splashed down, sending up a sheet of spray.
Water dousing his face, Langdon realized too late what had happened. The killer had grasped
one of the van’s roll bars and used it to swing outward. Now the Hassassin was sailing toward him,
feet-first through the spray.
Langdon pulled the trigger, and the silencer spat. The bullet exploded through the toe of the
Hassassin’s left boot. Instantly Langdon felt the soles of the Hassassin’s boots connect with his
chest, driving him back with a crushing kick.
The two men splashed down in a spray of blood and water.
As the icy liquid engulfed Langdon’s body, his first cognition was pain. Survival instinct
came next. He realized he was no longer holding his weapon. It had been knocked away. Diving
deep, he groped along the slimy bottom. His hand gripped metal. A handful of coins. He dropped
them. Opening his eyes, Langdon scanned the glowing basin. The water churned around him like a
frigid Jacuzzi.
Despite the instinct to breathe, fear kept him on the bottom. Always moving. He did not know
from where the next assault would come. He needed to find the gun! His hands groped desperately
in front of him.
You have the advantage , he told himself. You are in your element . Even in a soaked
turtleneck Langdon was an agile swimmer. Water is your element .
When Langdon’s fingers found metal a second time, he was certain his luck had changed. The
object in his hand was no handful of coins. He gripped it and tried to pull it toward him, but when
he did, he found himself gliding through the water. The object was stationary.
Langdon realized even before he coasted over the cardinal’s writhing body that he had
grasped part of the metal chain that was weighing the man down. Langdon hovered a moment,
immobilized by the sight of the terrified face staring up at him from the floor of the fountain.
Jolted by the life in the man’s eyes, Langdon reached down and grabbed the chains, trying to
heave him toward the surface. The body came slowly… like an anchor. Langdon pulled harder.
When the cardinal’s head broke the surface, the old man gasped a few sucking, desperate breaths.
Then, violently, his body rolled, causing Langdon to lose his grip on the slippery chains. Like a
stone, Baggia went down again and disappeared beneath the foaming water.
Langdon dove, eyes wide in the liquid murkiness. He found the cardinal. This time, when
Langdon grabbed on, the chains across Baggia’s chest shifted… parting to reveal a further
wickedness… a word stamped in seared flesh.
An instant later, two boots strode into view. One was gushing blood.
103
As a water polo player, Robert Langdon had endured more than his fair share of underwater
battles. The competitive savagery that raged beneath the surface of a water polo pool, away from
the eyes of the referees, could rival even the ugliest wrestling match. Langdon had been kicked,
scratched, held, and even bitten once by a frustrated defenseman from whom Langdon had
continuously twisted away.
Now, though, thrashing in the frigid water of Bernini’s fountain, Langdon knew he was a long
way from the Harvard pool. He was fighting not for a game, but for his life. This was the second
time they had battled. No referees here. No rematches. The arms driving his face toward the bottom
of the basin thrust with a force that left no doubt that it intended to kill.
Langdon instinctively spun like a torpedo. Break the hold! But the grip torqued him back,
his attacker enjoying an advantage no water polo defenseman ever had–two feet on solid ground.
Langdon contorted, trying to get his own feet beneath him. The Hassassin seemed to be favoring
one arm… but nonetheless, his grip held firm.
It was then that Langdon knew he was not coming up. He did the only thing he could think of
to do. He stopped trying to surface. If you can’t go north, go east . Marshalling the last of his
strength, Langdon dolphin-kicked his legs and pulled his arms beneath him in an awkward butterfly
stroke. His body lurched forward.
The sudden switch in direction seemed to take the Hassassin off guard. Langdon’s lateral
motion dragged his captor’s arms sideways, compromising his balance. The man’s grip faltered, and
Langdon kicked again. The sensation felt like a towline had snapped. Suddenly Langdon was free.
Blowing the stale air from his lungs, Langdon clawed for the surface. A single breath was all he got.
With crashing force the Hassassin was on top of him again, palms on his shoulders, all of his weight
bearing down. Langdon scrambled to plant his feet beneath him but the Hassassin’s leg swung out,
cutting Langdon down.
He went under again.
Langdon’s muscles burned as he twisted beneath the water. This time his maneuvers were in
vain. Through the bubbling water, Langdon scanned the bottom, looking for the gun. Everything
was blurred. The bubbles were denser here. A blinding light flashed in his face as the killer wrestled
him deeper, toward a submerged spotlight bolted on the floor of the fountain. Langdon reached out,
grabbing the canister. It was hot. Langdon tried to pull himself free, but the contraption was
mounted on hinges and pivoted in his hand. His leverage was instantly lost.
The Hassassin drove him deeper still.
It was then Langdon saw it. Poking out from under the coins directly beneath his face. A
narrow, black cylinder. The silencer of Olivetti’s gun! Langdon reached out, but as his fingers
wrapped around the cylinder, he did not feel metal, he felt plastic. When he pulled, the flexible
rubber hose came flopping toward him like a flimsy snake. It was about two feet long with a jet of
bubbles surging from the end. Langdon had not found the gun at all. It was one of the fountain’s
many harmless spumanti… bubble makers.
Only a few feet away, Cardinal Baggia felt his soul straining to leave his body. Although he
had prepared for this moment his entire life, he had never imagined the end would be like this. His
physical shell was in agony… burned, bruised, and held underwater by an immovable weight. He
reminded himself that this suffering was nothing compared to what Jesus had endured.
He died for my sins…
Baggia could hear the thrashing of a battle raging nearby. He could not bear the thought of it.
His captor was about to extinguish yet another life… the man with kind eyes, the man who had tried
to help.
As the pain mounted, Baggia lay on his back and stared up through the water at the black sky
above him. For a moment he thought he saw stars.
It was time.
Releasing all fear and doubt, Baggia opened his mouth and expelled what he knew would be
his final breath. He watched his spirit gurgle heavenward in a burst of transparent bubbles. Then,
reflexively, he gasped. The water poured in like icy daggers to his sides. The pain lasted only a few
seconds.
Then… peace.
The Hassassin ignored the burning in his foot and focused on the drowning American, whom
he now held pinned beneath him in the churning water. Finish it fully . He tightened his grip,
knowing this time Robert Langdon would not survive. As he predicted, his victim’s struggling
became weaker and weaker.
Suddenly Langdon’s body went rigid. He began to shake wildly.
Yes , the Hassassin mused. The rigors. When the water first hits the lungs . The rigors, he
knew, would last about five seconds.
They lasted six.
Then, exactly as the Hassassin expected, his victim went suddenly flaccid. Like a great
deflating balloon, Robert Langdon fell limp. It was over. The Hassassin held him down for another
thirty seconds to let the water flood all of his pulmonary tissue. Gradually, he felt Langdon’s body
sink, on its own accord, to the bottom. Finally, the Hassassin let go. The media would find a double
surprise in the Fountain of the Four Rivers.
“Tabban!” the Hassassin swore, clambering out of the fountain and looking at his bleeding
toe. The tip of his boot was shredded, and the front of his big toe had been sheared off. Angry at his
own carelessness, he tore the cuff from his pant leg and rammed the fabric into the toe of his boot.
Pain shot up his leg. “Ibn al-kalb!” He clenched his fists and rammed the cloth deeper. The
bleeding slowed until it was only a trickle.
Turning his thoughts from pain to pleasure, the Hassassin got into his van. His work in Rome
was done. He knew exactly what would soothe his discomfort. Vittoria Vetra was bound and
waiting. The Hassassin, even cold and wet, felt himself stiffen.
I have earned my reward .
Across town Vittoria awoke in pain. She was on her back. All of her muscles felt like stone.
Tight. Brittle. Her arms hurt. When she tried to move, she felt spasms in her shoulders. It took her a
moment to comprehend her hands were tied behind her back. Her initial reaction was confusion. Am
I dreaming? But when she tried to lift her head, the pain at the base of her skull informed her of
her wakefulness.
Confusion transforming to fear, she scanned her surroundings. She was in a crude, stone
room–large and well-furnished, lit by torches. Some kind of ancient meeting hall. Old-fashioned
benches sat in a circle nearby.
Vittoria felt a breeze, cold now on her skin. Nearby, a set of double doors stood open, beyond
them a balcony. Through the slits in the balustrade, Vittoria could have sworn she saw the Vatican.
104
Robert Langdon lay on a bed of coins at the bottom of the Fountain of the Four Rivers . His
mouth was still wrapped around the plastic hose. The air being pumped through the spumanti tube
to froth the fountain had been polluted by the pump, and his throat burned. He was not complaining,
though. He was alive.
He was not sure how accurate his imitation of a drowning man had been, but having been
around water his entire life, Langdon had certainly heard accounts. He had done his best. Near the
end, he had even blown all the air from his lungs and stopped breathing so that his muscle mass
would carry his body to the floor.
Thankfully, the Hassassin had bought it and let go.
Now, resting on the bottom of the fountain, Langdon had waited as long as he could wait. He
was about to start choking. He wondered if the Hassassin was still out there. Taking an acrid breath
from the tube, Langdon let go and swam across the bottom of the fountain until he found the
smooth swell of the central core. Silently, he followed it upward, surfacing out of sight, in the
shadows beneath the huge marble figures.
The van was gone.
That was all Langdon needed to see. Pulling a long breath of fresh air back into his lungs, he
scrambled back toward where Cardinal Baggia had gone down. Langdon knew the man would be
unconscious now, and chances of revival were slim, but he had to try. When Langdon found the
body, he planted his feet on either side, reached down, and grabbed the chains wrapped around the
cardinal. Then Langdon pulled. When the cardinal broke water, Langdon could see the eyes were
already rolled upward, bulging. Not a good sign. There was no breath or pulse.
Knowing he could never get the body up and over the fountain rim, Langdon lugged Cardinal
Baggia through the water and into the hollow beneath the central mound of marble. Here the water
became shallow, and there was an inclined ledge. Langdon dragged the naked body up onto the
ledge as far as he could. Not far.
Then he went to work. Compressing the cardinal’s chain-clad chest, Langdon pumped the
water from his lungs. Then he began CPR. Counting carefully. Deliberately. Resisting the instinct to
blow too hard and too fast. For three minutes Langdon tried to revive the old man. After five
minutes, Langdon knew it was over.
Il preferito . The man who would be Pope. Lying dead before him.
Somehow, even now, prostrate in the shadows on the semisubmerged ledge, Cardinal Baggia
retained an air of quiet dignity. The water lapped softly across his chest, seeming almost
remorseful… as if asking forgiveness for being the man’s ultimate killer… as if trying to cleanse
the scalded wound that bore its name.
Gently, Langdon ran a hand across the man’s face and closed his upturned eyes. As he did, he
felt an exhausted shudder of tears well from within. It startled him. Then, for the first time in years,
Langdon cried.
105
The fog of weary emotion lifted slowly as Langdon waded away from the dead cardinal, back
into deep water. Depleted and alone in the fountain, Langdon half-expected to collapse. But instead,
he felt a new compulsion rising within him. Undeniable. Frantic. He sensed his muscles hardening
with an unexpected grit. His mind, as though ignoring the pain in his heart, forced aside the past and
brought into focus the single, desperate task ahead.
Find the Illuminati lair. Help Vittoria .
Turning now to the mountainous core of Bernini’s fountain, Langdon summoned hope and
launched himself into his quest for the final Illuminati marker. He knew somewhere on this gnarled
mass of figures was a clue that pointed to the lair. As Langdon scanned the fountain, though, his
hope withered quickly. The words of the segno seemed to gurgle mockingly all around him. Let
angels guide you on your lofty quest . Langdon glared at the carved forms before him. The fountain
is pagan! It has no damn angels anywhere!
When Langdon completed his fruitless search of the core, his eyes instinctively climbed the
towering stone pillar. Four markers , he thought, spread across Rome in a giant cross .
Scanning the hieroglyphics covering the obelisk, he wondered if perhaps there were a clue
hidden in the Egyptian symbology. He immediately dismissed the idea. The hieroglyphs predated
Bernini by centuries, and hieroglyphs had not even been decipherable until the Rosetta Stone was
discovered. Still, Langdon ventured, maybe Bernini had carved an additional symbol? One that
would go unnoticed among all the hieroglyphs?
Feeling a shimmer of hope, Langdon circumnavigated the fountain one more time and studied
all four façades of the obelisk. It took him two minutes, and when he reached the end of the final
face, his hopes sank. Nothing in the hieroglyphs stood out as any kind of addition. Certainly no
angels.
Langdon checked his watch. It was eleven on the dot. He couldn’t tell whether time was
flying or crawling. Images of Vittoria and the Hassassin started to swirl hauntingly as Langdon
clambered his way around the fountain, the frustration mounting as he frantically completed yet
another fruitless circle. Beaten and exhausted, Langdon felt ready to collapse. He threw back his
head to scream into the night.
The sound jammed in his throat.
Langdon was staring straight up the obelisk. The object perched at the very top was one he
had seen earlier and ignored. Now, however, it stopped him short. It was not an angel. Far from it.
In fact, he had not even perceived it as part of Bernini’s fountain. He thought it was a living
creature, another one of the city’s scavengers perched on a lofty tower.
A pigeon .
Langdon squinted skyward at the object, his vision blurred by the glowing mist around him. It
was a pigeon, wasn’t it? He could clearly see the head and beak silhouetted against a cluster of
stars. And yet the bird had not budged since Langdon’s arrival, even with the battle below. The bird
sat now exactly as it had been when Langdon entered the square. It was perched high atop the
obelisk, gazing calmly westward.
Langdon stared at it a moment and then plunged his hand into the fountain and grabbed a
fistful of coins. He hurled the coins skyward. They clattered across the upper levels of the granite
obelisk. The bird did not budge. He tried again. This time, one of the coins hit the mark. A faint
sound of metal on metal clanged across the square.
The damned pigeon was bronze.
You’re looking for an angel, not a pigeon , a voice reminded him. But it was too late.
Langdon had made the connection. He realized the bird was not a pigeon at all.
It was a dove.
Barely aware of his own actions, Langdon splashed toward the center of the fountain and
began scrambling up the travertine mountain, clambering over huge arms and heads, pulling himself
higher. Halfway to the base of the obelisk, he emerged from the mist and could see the head of the
bird more clearly.
There was no doubt. It was a dove. The bird’s deceptively dark color was the result of Rome’s
pollution tarnishing the original bronze. Then the significance hit him. He had seen a pair of doves
earlier today at the Pantheon. A pair of doves carried no meaning. This dove, however, was alone.
The lone dove is the pagan symbol for the Angel of Peace .
The truth almost lifted Langdon the rest of the way to the obelisk. Bernini had chosen the
pagan symbol for the angel so he could disguise it in a pagan fountain. Let angels guide you on
your lofty quest. The dove is the angel! Langdon could think of no more lofty perch for the
Illuminati’s final marker than atop this obelisk.
The bird was looking west. Langdon tried to follow its gaze, but he could not see over the
buildings. He climbed higher. A quote from St. Gregory of Nyssa emerged from his memory most
unexpectedly. As the soul becomes enlightened… it takes the beautiful shape of the dove .
Langdon rose heavenward. Toward the dove. He was almost flying now. He reached the
platform from which the obelisk rose and could climb no higher. With one look around, though, he
knew he didn’t have to. All of Rome spread out before him. The view was stunning.
To his left, the chaotic media lights surrounding St. Peter’s. To his right, the smoking cupola
of Santa Maria della Vittoria. In front of him in the distance, Piazza del Popolo. Beneath him, the
fourth and final point. A giant cross of obelisks.
Trembling, Langdon looked to the dove overhead. He turned and faced the proper direction,
and then he lowered his eyes to the skyline.
In an instant he saw it.
So obvious. So clear. So deviously simple.
Staring at it now, Langdon could not believe the Illuminati lair had stayed hidden for so many
years. The entire city seemed to fade away as he looked out at the monstrous stone structure across
the river in front of him. The building was as famous as any in Rome. It stood on the banks of the
Tiber River diagonally adjacent to the Vatican. The building’s geometry was stark–a circular castle,
within a square fortress, and then, outside its walls, surrounding the entire structure, a park in the
shape of a pentagram .
The ancient stone ramparts before him were dramatically lit by soft floodlights. High atop the
castle stood the mammoth bronze angel. The angel pointed his sword downward at the exact center
of the castle. And as if that were not enough, leading solely and directly to the castle’s main
entrance stood the famous Bridge of Angels… a dramatic approachway adorned by twelve towering
angels carved by none other than Bernini himself.
In a final breathtaking revelation, Langdon realized Bernini’s city-wide cross of obelisks
marked the fortress in perfect Illuminati fashion; the cross’s central arm passed directly through
the center of the castle’s bridge, dividing it into two equal halves.
Langdon retrieved his tweed coat, holding it away from his dripping body. Then he jumped
into the stolen sedan and rammed his soggy shoe into the accelerator, speeding off into the night.
106
It was 11:07 P.M. Langdon’s car raced through the Roman night. Speeding down
Lungotevere Tor Di Nona, parallel with the river, Langdon could now see his destination rising like
a mountain to his right.
Castel Sant’ Angelo . Castle of the Angel.
Without warning, the turnoff to the narrow Bridge of Angels–Ponte Sant’ Angelo–appeared
suddenly. Langdon slammed on his brakes and swerved. He turned in time, but the bridge was
barricaded. He skidded ten feet and collided with a series of short cement pillars blocking his way.
Langdon lurched forward as the vehicle stalled, wheezing and shuddering. He had forgotten the
Bridge of Angels, in order to preserve it, was now zoned pedestrians only.
Shaken, Langdon staggered from the crumpled car, wishing now he had chosen one of the
other routes. He felt chilled, shivering from the fountain. He donned his Harris tweed over his damp
shirt, grateful for Harris’s trademark double lining. The Diagramma folio would remain dry.
Before him, across the bridge, the stone fortress rose like a mountain. Aching and depleted,
Langdon broke into a loping run.
On both sides of him now, like a gauntlet of escorts, a procession of Bernini angels whipped
past, funneling him toward his final destination. Let angels guide you on your lofty quest . The
castle seemed to rise as he advanced, an unscalable peak, more intimidating to him even than St.
Peter’s. He sprinted toward the bastion, running on fumes, gazing upward at the citadel’s circular
core as it shot skyward to a gargantuan, sword-wielding angel.
The castle appeared deserted.
Langdon knew through the centuries the building had been used by the Vatican as a tomb, a
fortress, a papal hideout, a prison for enemies of the church, and a museum. Apparently, the castle
had other tenants as well–the Illuminati. Somehow it made eerie sense. Although the castle was
property of the Vatican, it was used only sporadically, and Bernini had made numerous renovations
to it over the years. The building was now rumored to be honeycombed with secret entries,
passageways, and hidden chambers. Langdon had little doubt that the angel and surrounding
pentagonal park were Bernini’s doing as well.
Arriving at the castle’s elephantine double doors, Langdon shoved them hard. Not
surprisingly, they were immovable. Two iron knockers hung at eye level. Langdon didn’t bother.
He stepped back, his eyes climbing the sheer outer wall. These ramparts had fended off armies of
Berbers, heathens, and Moors. Somehow he sensed his chances of breaking in were slim.
Vittoria , Langdon thought. Are you in there?
Langdon hurried around the outer wall. There must be another entrance!
Rounding the second bulwark to the west, Langdon arrived breathless in a small parking area
off Lungotere Angelo. On this wall he found a second castle entrance, a drawbridge-type ingress,
raised and sealed shut. Langdon gazed upward again.
The only lights on the castle were exterior floods illuminating the façade. All the tiny
windows inside seemed black. Langdon’s eyes climbed higher. At the very peak of the central
tower, a hundred feet above, directly beneath the angel’s sword, a single balcony protruded. The
marble parapet seemed to shimmer slightly, as if the room beyond it were aglow with torchlight.
Langdon paused, his soaked body shivering suddenly. A shadow? He waited, straining. Then he
saw it again. His spine prickled. Someone is up there!
“Vittoria!” he called out, unable to help himself, but his voice was swallowed by the raging
Tiber behind him. He wheeled in circles, wondering where the hell the Swiss Guard were. Had they
even heard his transmission?
Across the lot a large media truck was parked. Langdon ran toward it. A paunchy man in
headphones sat in the cabin adjusting levers. Langdon rapped on the side of the truck. The man
jumped, saw Langdon’s dripping clothes, and yanked off his headset.
“What’s the worry, mate?” His accent was Australian.
“I need your phone.” Langdon was frenzied.
The man shrugged. “No dial tone. Been trying all night. Circuits are packed.”
Langdon swore aloud. “Have you seen anyone go in there?” He pointed to the drawbridge.
“Actually, yeah. A black van’s been going in and out all night.”
Langdon felt a brick hit the bottom of his stomach.
“Lucky bastard,” the Aussie said, gazing up at the tower, and then frowning at his obstructed
view of the Vatican. “I bet the view from up there is perfect. I couldn’t get through the traffic in St.
Peter’s, so I’m shooting from here.”
Langdon wasn’t listening. He was looking for options.
“What do you say?” the Australian said. “This 11th Hour Samaritan for real?”
Langdon turned. “The what?”
“You didn’t hear? The Captain of the Swiss Guard got a call from somebody who claims to
have some primo info. The guy’s flying in right now. All I know is if he saves the day… there go
the ratings!” The man laughed.
Langdon was suddenly confused. A good Samaritan flying in to help? Did the person
somehow know where the antimatter was? Then why didn’t he just tell the Swiss Guard? Why was
he coming in person? Something was odd, but Langdon didn’t have time to figure out what.
“Hey,” the Aussie said, studying Langdon more closely. “Ain’t you that guy I saw on TV?
Trying to save that cardinal in St. Peter’s Square?”
Langdon did not answer. His eyes had suddenly locked on a contraption attached to the top of
the truck–a satellite dish on a collapsible appendage. Langdon looked at the castle again. The outer
rampart was fifty feet tall. The inner fortress climbed farther still. A shelled defense. The top was
impossibly high from here, but maybe if he could clear the first wall…
Langdon spun to the newsman and pointed to the satellite arm. “How high does that go?”
“Huh?” The man looked confused. “Fifteen meters. Why?”
“Move the truck. Park next to the wall. I need help.”
“What are you talking about?”
Langdon explained.
The Aussie’s eyes went wide. “Are you insane? That’s a twohundred-
thousand-dollar telescoping extension. Not a ladder!”
“You want ratings? I’ve got information that will make your day.” Langdon was desperate.
“Information worth two hundred grand?”
Langdon told him what he would reveal in exchange for the favor.
Ninety seconds later, Robert Langdon was gripping the top of the satellite arm wavering in
the breeze fifty feet off the ground. Leaning out, he grabbed the top of the first bulwark, dragged
himself onto the wall, and dropped onto the castle’s lower bastion.
“Now keep your bargain!” the Aussie called up. “Where is he?”
Langdon felt guilt-ridden for revealing this information, but a deal was a deal. Besides, the
Hassassin would probably call the press anyway. “Piazza Navona,” Langdon shouted. “He’s in the
fountain.”
The Aussie lowered his satellite dish and peeled out after the scoop of his career.
In a stone chamber high above the city, the Hassassin removed his soaking boots and
bandaged his wounded toe. There was pain, but not so much that he couldn’t enjoy himself.
He turned to his prize.
She was in the corner of the room, on her back on a rudimentary divan, hands tied behind her,
mouth gagged. The Hassassin moved toward her. She was awake now. This pleased him.
Surprisingly, in her eyes, he saw fire instead of fear.
The fear will come .
107
Robert Langdon dashed around the outer bulwark of the castle, grateful for the glow of the
floodlights. As he circled the wall, the courtyard beneath him looked like a museum of ancient
warfare–catapults, stacks of marble cannonballs, and an arsenal of fearful contraptions. Parts of the
castle were open to tourists during the day, and the courtyard had been partially restored to its
original state.
Langdon’s eyes crossed the courtyard to the central core of the fortress. The circular citadel
shot skyward 107 feet to the bronze angel above. The balcony at the top still glowed from within.
Langdon wanted to call out but knew better. He would have to find a way in.
He checked his watch.
11:12 P.M.
Dashing down the stone ramp that hugged the inside of the wall, Langdon descended to the
courtyard. Back on ground level, he ran through shadows, clockwise around the fort. He passed
three porticos, but all of them were permanently sealed. How did the Hassassin get in? Langdon
pushed on. He passed two modern entrances, but they were padlocked from the outside. Not here .
He kept running.
Langdon had circled almost the entire building when he saw a gravel drive cutting across the
courtyard in front of him. At one end, on the outer wall of the castle, he saw the back of the gated
drawbridge leading back outside. At the other end, the drive disappeared into the fortress. The drive
seemed to enter a kind of tunnel–a gaping entry in the central core. Il traforo! Langdon had read
about this castle’s traforo , a giant spiral ramp that circled up inside the fort, used by commanders
on horseback to ride from top to bottom rapidly. The Hassassin drove up! The gate blocking the
tunnel was raised, ushering Langdon in. He felt almost exuberant as he ran toward the tunnel. But as
he reached the opening, his excitement disappeared.
The tunnel spiraled down .
The wrong way. This section of the traforo apparently descended to the dungeons, not to the
top.
Standing at the mouth of a dark bore that seemed to twist endlessly deeper into the earth,
Langdon hesitated, looking up again at the balcony. He could swear he saw motion up there.
Decide! With no other options, he dashed down into the tunnel.
High overhead, the Hassassin stood over his prey. He ran a hand across her arm. Her skin was
like cream. The anticipation of exploring her bodily treasures was inebriating. How many ways
could he violate her?
The Hassassin knew he deserved this woman. He had served Janus well. She was a spoil of
war, and when he was finished with her, he would pull her from the divan and force her to her
knees. She would service him again. The ultimate submission . Then, at the moment of his own
climax, he would slit her throat.
Ghayat assa’adah , they called it. The ultimate pleasure .
Afterward, basking in his glory, he would stand on the balcony and savor the culmination of
the Illuminati triumph… a revenge desired by so many for so long.
The tunnel grew darker. Langdon descended.
After one complete turn into the earth, the light was all but gone. The tunnel leveled out, and
Langdon slowed, sensing by the echo of his footfalls that he had just entered a larger chamber.
Before him in the murkiness, he thought he saw glimmers of light… fuzzy reflections in the
ambient gleam. He moved forward, reaching out his hand. He found smooth surfaces. Chrome and
glass. It was a vehicle. He groped the surface, found a door, and opened it.
The vehicle’s interior dome-light flashed on. He stepped back and recognized the black van
immediately. Feeling a surge of loathing, he stared a moment, then he dove in, rooting around in
hopes of finding a weapon to replace the one he’d lost in the fountain. He found none. He did,
however, find Vittoria’s cell phone. It was shattered and useless. The sight of it filled Langdon with
fear. He prayed he was not too late.
He reached up and turned on the van’s headlights. The room around him blazed into
existence, harsh shadows in a simple chamber. Langdon guessed the room was once used for horses
and ammunition. It was also a dead end.
No exit. I came the wrong way!
At the end of his rope, Langdon jumped from the van and scanned the walls around him. No
doorways. No gates. He thought of the angel over the tunnel entrance and wondered if it had been a
coincidence. No! He thought of the killer’s words at the fountain. She is in the Church of
Illumination… awaiting my return . Langdon had come too far to fail now. His heart was pounding.
Frustration and hatred were starting to cripple his senses.
When he saw the blood on the floor, Langdon’s first thought was for Vittoria. But as his eyes
followed the stains, he realized they were bloody footprints. The strides were long. The splotches of
blood were only on the left foot. The Hassassin!
Langdon followed the footprints toward the corner of the room, his sprawling shadow
growing fainter. He felt more and more puzzled with every step. The bloody prints looked as though
they walked directly into the corner of the room and then disappeared.
When Langdon arrived in the corner, he could not believe his eyes. The granite block in the
floor here was not a square like the others. He was looking at another signpost. The block was
carved into a perfect pentagram, arranged with the tip pointing into the corner. Ingeniously
concealed by overlapping walls, a narrow slit in the stone served as an exit. Langdon slid through.
He was in a passage. In front of him were the remains of a wooden barrier that had once been
blocking this tunnel.
Beyond it there was light.
Langdon was running now. He clambered over the wood and headed for the light. The
passage quickly opened into another, larger chamber. Here a single torch flickered on the wall.
Langdon was in a section of the castle that had no electricity… a section no tourists would ever see.
The room would have been frightful in daylight, but the torch made it even more gruesome.
Il prigione .
There were a dozen tiny jail cells, the iron bars on most eroded away. One of the larger cells,
however, remained intact, and on the floor Langdon saw something that almost stopped his heart.
Black robes and red sashes on the floor. This is where he held the cardinals!
Near the cell was an iron doorway in the wall. The door was ajar and beyond it Langdon
could see some sort of passage. He ran toward it. But Langdon stopped before he got there. The trail
of blood did not enter the passage. When Langdon saw the words carved over the archway, he knew
why.
Il Passetto .
He was stunned. He had heard of this tunnel many times, never knowing where exactly the
entrance was. Il Passetto –The Little Passage–was a slender, three-quarter-mile tunnel built between
Castle St. Angelo and the Vatican. It had been used by various Popes to escape to safety during
sieges of the Vatican… as well as by a few less pious Popes to secretly visit mistresses or oversee
the torture of their enemies. Nowadays both ends of the tunnel were supposedly sealed with
impenetrable locks whose keys were kept in some Vatican vault. Langdon suddenly feared he knew
how the Illuminati had been moving in and out of the Vatican. He found himself wondering who
on the inside had betrayed the church and coughed up the keys. Olivetti? One of the Swiss Guard?
None of it mattered anymore.
The blood on the floor led to the opposite end of the prison. Langdon followed. Here, a rusty
gate hung draped with chains. The lock had been removed and the gate stood ajar. Beyond the gate
was a steep ascension of spiral stairs. The floor here was also marked with a pentagramal block.
Langdon stared at the block, trembling, wondering if Bernini himself had held the chisel that had
shaped these chunks. Overhead, the archway was adorned with a tiny carved cherub. This was it.
The trail of blood curved up the stairs.
Before ascending, Langdon knew he needed a weapon, any weapon. He found a four-foot
section of iron bar near one of the cells. It had a sharp, splintered end. Although absurdly heavy, it
was the best he could do. He hoped the element of surprise, combined with the Hassassin’s wound,
would be enough to tip the scales in his advantage. Most of all, though, he hoped he was not too
late.
The staircase’s spiral treads were worn and twisted steeply upward. Langdon ascended,
listening for sounds. None. As he climbed, the light from the prison area faded away. He ascended
into the total darkness, keeping one hand on the wall. Higher. In the blackness, Langdon sensed the
ghost of Galileo, climbing these very stairs, eager to share his visions of heaven with other men of
science and faith.
Langdon was still in a state of shock over the location of the lair. The Illuminati meeting hall
was in a building owned by the Vatican. No doubt while the Vatican guards were out searching
basements and homes of well-known scientists, the Illuminati were meeting here … right under the
Vatican’s nose. It suddenly seemed so perfect. Bernini, as head architect of renovations here, would
have had unlimited access to this structure… remodeling it to his own specifications with no
questions asked. How many secret entries had Bernini added? How many subtle embellishments
pointing the way?
The Church of Illumination . Langdon knew he was close.
As the stairs began narrowing, Langdon felt the passage closing around him. The shadows of
history were whispering in the dark, but he moved on. When he saw the horizontal shaft of light
before him, he realized he was standing a few steps beneath a landing, where the glow of torchlight
spilled out beneath the threshold of a door in front of him. Silently he moved up.
Langdon had no idea where in the castle he was right now, but he knew he had climbed far
enough to be near the peak. He pictured the mammoth angel atop the castle and suspected it was
directly overhead.
Watch over me, angel , he thought, gripping the bar. Then, silently, he reached for the door.
On the divan, Vittoria’s arms ached. When she had first awoken to find them tied behind her
back, she’d thought she might be able to relax and work her hands free. But time had run out. The
beast had returned. Now he was standing over her, his chest bare and powerful, scarred from battles
he had endured. His eyes looked like two black slits as he stared down at her body. Vittoria sensed
he was imagining the deeds he was about to perform. Slowly, as if to taunt her, the Hassassin
removed his soaking belt and dropped it on the floor.
Vittoria felt a loathing horror. She closed her eyes. When she opened them again, the
Hassassin had produced a switchblade knife. He snapped it open directly in front of her face.
Vittoria saw her own terrified reflection in the steel.
The Hassassin turned the blade over and ran the back of it across her belly. The icy metal
gave her chills. With a contemptuous stare, he slipped the blade below the waistline of her shorts.
She inhaled. He moved back and forth, slowly, dangerously… lower. Then he leaned forward, his
hot breath whispering in her ear.
“This blade cut out your father’s eye.”
Vittoria knew in that instant that she was capable of killing.
The Hassassin turned the blade again and began sawing upward through the fabric of her
khaki shorts. Suddenly, he stopped, looking up. Someone was in the room.
“Get away from her,” a deep voice growled from the doorway.
Vittoria could not see who had spoken, but she recognized the voice. Robert! He’s alive!
The Hassassin looked as if he had seen a ghost. “Mr. Langdon, you must have a guardian
angel.”
108
In the split second it took Langdon to take in his surroundings, he realized he was in a sacred
place. The embellishments in the oblong room, though old and faded, were replete with familiar
symbology. Pentagram tiles. Planet frescoes. Doves. Pyramids.
The Church of Illumination . Simple and pure. He had arrived.
Directly in front of him, framed in the opening of the balcony, stood the Hassassin. He was
bare chested, standing over Vittoria, who lay bound but very much alive. Langdon felt a wave of
relief to see her. For an instant, their eyes met, and a torrent of emotions flowed–gratitude,
desperation, and regret.
“So we meet yet again,” the Hassassin said. He looked at the bar in Langdon’s hand and
laughed out loud. “And this time you come for me with that ?”
“Untie her.”
The Hassassin put the knife to Vittoria’s throat. “I will kill her.”
Langdon had no doubt the Hassassin was capable of such an act. He forced a calm into his
voice. “I imagine she would welcome it… considering the alternative.”
The Hassassin smiled at the insult. “You’re right. She has much to offer. It would be a waste.”
Langdon stepped forward, grasping the rusted bar, and aimed the splintered end directly at the
Hassassin. The cut on his hand bit sharply. “Let her go.”
The Hassassin seemed for a moment to be considering it. Exhaling, he dropped his shoulders.
It was a clear motion of surrender, and yet at that exact instant the Hassassin’s arm seemed to
accelerate unexpectedly. There was a blur of dark muscle, and a blade suddenly came tearing
through the air toward Langdon’s chest.
Whether it was instinct or exhaustion that buckled Langdon’s knees at that moment, he didn’t
know, but the knife sailed past his left ear and clattered to the floor behind him. The Hassassin
seemed unfazed. He smiled at Langdon, who was kneeling now, holding the metal bar. The killer
stepped away from Vittoria and moved toward Langdon like a stalking lion.
As Langdon scrambled to his feet, lifting the bar again, his wet turtleneck and pants felt
suddenly more restrictive. The Hassassin, half-clothed, seemed to move much faster, the wound on
his foot apparently not slowing him at all. Langdon sensed this was a man accustomed to pain. For
the first time in his life, Langdon wished he were holding a very big gun.
The Hassassin circled slowly, as if enjoying himself, always just out of reach, moving toward
the knife on the floor. Langdon cut him off. Then the killer moved back toward Vittoria. Again
Langdon cut him off.
“There’s still time,” Langdon ventured. “Tell me where the canister is. The Vatican will pay
more than the Illuminati ever could.”
“You are naive.”
Langdon jabbed with the bar. The Hassassin dodged. He navigated around a bench, holding
the weapon in front of him, trying to corner the Hassassin in the oval room. This damn room has no
corners! Oddly, the Hassassin did not seem interested in attacking or fleeing. He was simply
playing Langdon’s game. Coolly waiting.
Waiting for what? The killer kept circling, a master at positioning himself. It was like an
endless game of chess. The weapon in Langdon’s hand was getting heavy, and he suddenly sensed
he knew what the Hassassin was waiting for. He’s tiring me out . It was working, too. Langdon was
hit by a surge of weariness, the adrenaline alone no longer enough to keep him alert. He knew he
had to make a move.
The Hassassin seemed to read Langdon’s mind, shifting again, as if intentionally leading
Langdon toward a table in the middle of the room. Langdon could tell there was something on the
table. Something glinted in the torchlight. A weapon? Langdon kept his eyes focused on the
Hassassin and maneuvered himself closer to the table. When the Hassassin cast a long, guileless
glance at the table, Langdon tried to fight the obvious bait. But instinct overruled. He stole a glance.
The damage was done.
It was not a weapon at all. The sight momentarily riveted him.
On the table lay a rudimentary copper chest, crusted with ancient patina. The chest was a
pentagon. The lid lay open. Arranged inside in five padded compartments were five brands. The
brands were forged of iron–large embossing tools with stout handles of wood. Langdon had no
doubt what they said.
Illuminati, Earth, Air, Fire, Water.
Langdon snapped his head back up, fearing the Hassassin would lunge. He did not. The killer
was waiting, almost as if he were refreshed by the game. Langdon fought to recover his focus,
locking eyes again with his quarry, thrusting with the pipe. But the image of the box hung in his
mind. Although the brands themselves were mesmerizing–artifacts few Illuminati scholars even
believed existed–Langdon suddenly realized there had been something else about the box that had
ignited a wave of foreboding within. As the Hassassin maneuvered again, Langdon stole another
glance downward.
My God!
In the chest, the five brands sat in compartments around the outer edge. But in the center ,
there was another compartment. This partition was empty, but it clearly was intended to hold
another brand… a brand much larger than the others, and perfectly square.
The attack was a blur.
The Hassassin swooped toward him like a bird of prey. Langdon, his concentration having
been masterfully diverted, tried to counter, but the pipe felt like a tree trunk in his hands. His parry
was too slow. The Hassassin dodged. As Langdon tried to retract the bar, the Hassassin’s hands shot
out and grabbed it. The man’s grip was strong, his injured arm seeming no longer to affect him.
Violently, the two men struggled. Langdon felt the bar ripped away, and a searing pain shot through
his palm. An instant later, Langdon was staring into the splintered point of the weapon. The hunter
had become the hunted.
Langdon felt like he’d been hit by a cyclone. The Hassassin circled, smiling now, backing
Langdon against the wall. “What is your American adágio ?” he chided. “Something about curiosity
and the cat?”
Langdon could barely focus. He cursed his carelessness as the Hassassin moved in. Nothing
was making sense. A sixth Illuminati brand? In frustration he blurted, “I’ve never read anything
about a sixth Illuminati brand!”
“I think you probably have.” The killer chuckled as he herded Langdon around the oval wall.
Langdon was lost. He most certainly had not. There were five Illuminati brands. He backed
up, searching the room for any weapon at all.
“A perfect union of the ancient elements,” the Hassassin said. “The final brand is the most
brilliant of all. I’m afraid you will never see it, though.”
Langdon sensed he would not be seeing much of anything in a moment. He kept backing up,
searching the room for an option. “And you’ve seen this final brand?” Langdon demanded, trying to
buy time.
“Someday perhaps they will honor me. As I prove myself.” He jabbed at Langdon, as if
enjoying a game.
Langdon slid backward again. He had the feeling the Hassassin was directing him around the
wall toward some unseen destination. Where? Langdon could not afford to look behind him. “The
brand?” he demanded. “Where is it?”
“Not here. Janus is apparently the only one who holds it.”
“Janus?” Langdon did not recognize the name.
“The Illuminati leader. He is arriving shortly.”
“The Illuminati leader is coming here ?”
“To perform the final branding.”
Langdon shot a frightened glance to Vittoria. She looked strangely calm, her eyes closed to
the world around her, her lungs pulling slowly… deeply. Was she the final victim? Was he?
“Such conceit,” the Hassassin sneered, watching Langdon’s eyes. “The two of you are
nothing. You will die, of course, that is for certain. But the final victim of whom I speak is a truly
dangerous enemy.”
Langdon tried to make sense of the Hassassin’s words. A dangerous enemy? The top cardinals
were all dead. The Pope was dead. The Illuminati had wiped them all out. Langdon found the
answer in the vacuum of the Hassassin’s eyes.
The camerlegno .
Camerlegno Ventresca was the one man who had been a beacon of hope for the world through
this entire tribulation. The camerlegno had done more to condemn the Illuminati tonight than
decades of conspiracy theorists. Apparently he would pay the price. He was the Illuminati’s final
target.
“You’ll never get to him,” Langdon challenged.
“Not I,” the Hassassin replied, forcing Langdon farther back around the wall. “That honor is
reserved for Janus himself.”
“The Illuminati leader himself intends to brand the camerlegno?”
“Power has its privileges.”
“But no one could possibly get into Vatican City right now!”
The Hassassin looked smug. “Not unless he had an appointment.”
Langdon was confused. The only person expected at the Vatican right now was the person the
press was calling the 11th Hour Samaritan–the person Rocher said had information that could save–
Langdon stopped short. Good God!
The Hassassin smirked, clearly enjoying Langdon’s sickening cognition. “I too wondered how
Janus would gain entrance. Then in the van I heard the radio–a report about an 11th hour
Samaritan.” He smiled. “The Vatican will welcome Janus with open arms.”
Langdon almost stumbled backward. Janus is the Samaritan! It was an unthinkable
deception. The Illuminati leader would get a royal escort directly to the camerlegno’s chambers. But
how did Janus fool Rocher? Or was Rocher somehow involved? Langdon felt a chill. Ever since
he had almost suffocated in the secret archives, Langdon had not entirely trusted Rocher.
The Hassassin jabbed suddenly, nicking Langdon in the side.
Langdon jumped back, his temper flaring. “Janus will never get out alive!”
The Hassassin shrugged. “Some causes are worth dying for.”
Langdon sensed the killer was serious. Janus coming to Vatican City on a suicide mission?
A question of honor? For an instant, Langdon’s mind took in the entire terrifying cycle. The
Illuminati plot had come full circle. The priest whom the Illuminati had inadvertently brought to
power by killing the Pope had emerged as a worthy adversary. In a final act of defiance, the
Illuminati leader would destroy him.
Suddenly, Langdon felt the wall behind him disappear. There was a rush of cool air, and he
staggered backward into the night. The balcony! He now realized what the Hassassin had in mind.
Langdon immediately sensed the precipice behind him–a hundred-foot drop to the courtyard
below. He had seen it on his way in. The Hassassin wasted no time. With a violent surge, he lunged.
The spear sliced toward Langdon’s midsection. Langdon skidded back, and the point came up short,
catching only his shirt. Again the point came at him. Langdon slid farther back, feeling the banister
right behind him. Certain the next jab would kill him, Langdon attempted the absurd. Spinning to
one side, he reached out and grabbed the shaft, sending a jolt of pain through his palm. Langdon
held on.
The Hassassin seemed unfazed. They strained for a moment against one another, face to face,
the Hassassin’s breath fetid in Langdon’s nostrils. The bar began to slip. The Hassassin was too
strong. In a final act of desperation, Langdon stretched out his leg, dangerously off balance as he
tried to ram his foot down on the Hassassin’s injured toe. But the man was a professional and
adjusted to protect his weakness.
Langdon had just played his final card. And he knew he had lost the hand.
The Hassassin’s arms exploded upward, driving Langdon back against the railing. Langdon
sensed nothing but empty space behind him as the railing hit just beneath his buttocks. The
Hassassin held the bar crosswise and drove it into Langdon’s chest. Langdon’s back arched over the
chasm.
“Ma’assalamah ,” the Hassassin sneered. “Good-bye.”
With a merciless glare, the Hassassin gave a final shove. Langdon’s center of gravity shifted,
and his feet swung up off the floor. With only one hope of survival, Langdon grabbed on to the
railing as he went over. His left hand slipped, but his right hand held on. He ended up hanging
upside down by his legs and one hand… straining to hold on.
Looming over him, the Hassassin raised the bar overhead, preparing to bring it crashing
down. As the bar began to accelerate, Langdon saw a vision. Perhaps it was the imminence of death
or simply blind fear, but in that moment, he sensed a sudden aura surrounding the Hassassin. A
glowing effulgence seemed to swell out of nothing behind him… like an incoming fireball.
Halfway through his swing, the Hassassin dropped the bar and screamed in agony.
The iron bar clattered past Langdon out into the night. The Hassassin spun away from him,
and Langdon saw a blistering torch burn on the killer’s back. Langdon pulled himself up to see
Vittoria, eyes flaring, now facing the Hassassin.
Vittoria waved a torch in front of her, the vengeance in her face resplendent in the flames.
How she had escaped, Langdon did not know or care. He began scrambling back up over the
banister.
The battle would be short. The Hassassin was a deadly match. Screaming with rage, the killer
lunged for her. She tried to dodge, but the man was on her, holding the torch and about to wrestle it
away. Langdon did not wait. Leaping off the banister, Langdon jabbed his clenched fist into the
blistered burn on the Hassassin’s back.
The scream seemed to echo all the way to the Vatican.
The Hassassin froze a moment, his back arched in anguish. He let go of the torch, and Vittoria
thrust it hard into his face. There was a hiss of flesh as his left eye sizzled. He screamed again,
raising his hands to his face.
“Eye for an eye,” Vittoria hissed. This time she swung the torch like a bat, and when it
connected, the Hassassin stumbled back against the railing. Langdon and Vittoria went for him at
the same instant, both heaving and pushing. The Hassassin’s body sailed backward over the banister
into the night. There was no scream. The only sound was the crack of his spine as he landed
spread-eagle on a pile of cannonballs far below.
Langdon turned and stared at Vittoria in bewilderment. Slackened ropes hung off her
midsection and shoulders. Her eyes blazed like an inferno.
“Houdini knew yoga.”
109
Meanwhile, in St. Peter’s Square, the wall of Swiss Guards yelled orders and fanned outward,
trying to push the crowds back to a safer distance. It was no use. The crowd was too dense and
seemed far more interested in the Vatican’s impending doom than in their own safety. The towering
media screens in the square were now transmitting a live countdown of the antimatter canister–a
direct feed from the Swiss Guard security monitor–compliments of the camerlegno. Unfortunately,
the image of the canister counting down was doing nothing to repel the crowds. The people in the
square apparently looked at the tiny droplet of liquid suspended in the canister and decided it was
not as menacing as they had thought. They could also see the countdown clock now–a little under
forty-five minutes until detonation. Plenty of time to stay and watch.
Nonetheless, the Swiss Guards unanimously agreed that the camerlegno’s bold decision to
address the world with the truth and then provide the media with actual visuals of Illuminati
treachery had been a savvy maneuver. The Illuminati had no doubt expected the Vatican to be their
usual reticent selves in the face of adversity. Not tonight. Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca had proven
himself a commanding foe.
Inside the Sistine Chapel, Cardinal Mortati was getting restless. It was past 11:15 P.M. Many
of the cardinals were continuing to pray, but others had clustered around the exit, clearly unsettled
by the hour. Some of the cardinals began pounding on the door with their fists.
Outside the door Lieutenant Chartrand heard the pounding and didn’t know what to do. He
checked his watch. It was time. Captain Rocher had given strict orders that the cardinals were not to
be let out until he gave the word. The pounding on the door became more intense, and Chartrand
felt uneasy. He wondered if the captain had simply forgotten. The captain had been acting very
erratic since his mysterious phone call.
Chartrand pulled out his walkie-talkie. “Captain? Chartrand here. It is past time. Should I
open the Sistine?”
“That door stays shut. I believe I already gave you that order.”
“Yes, sir, I just–”
“Our guest is arriving shortly. Take a few men upstairs, and guard the door of the Pope’s
office. The camerlegno is not to go anywhere .”
“I’m sorry, sir?”
“What is it that you don’t understand, Lieutenant?”
“Nothing, sir. I am on my way.”
Upstairs in the Office of the Pope, the camerlegno stared in quiet meditation at the fire. Give
me strength, God. Bring us a miracle . He poked at the coals, wondering if he would survive the
night.
110
Eleven-twenty-three P.M.
Vittoria stood trembling on the balcony of Castle St. Angelo, staring out across Rome, her
eyes moist with tears. She wanted badly to embrace Robert Langdon, but she could not. Her body
felt anesthetized. Readjusting. Taking stock. The man who had killed her father lay far below, dead,
and she had almost been a victim as well.
When Langdon’s hand touched her shoulder, the infusion of warmth seemed to magically
shatter the ice. Her body shuddered back to life. The fog lifted, and she turned. Robert looked like
hell–wet and matted–he had obviously been through purgatory to come rescue her.
“Thank you…” she whispered.
Langdon gave an exhausted smile and reminded her that it was she who deserved thanks–her
ability to practically dislocate her shoulders had just saved them both. Vittoria wiped her eyes. She
could have stood there forever with him, but the reprieve was short-lived.
“We need to get out of here,” Langdon said.
Vittoria’s mind was elsewhere. She was staring out toward the Vatican. The world’s smallest
country looked unsettlingly close, glowing white under a barrage of media lights. To her shock,
much of St. Peter’s Square was still packed with people! The Swiss Guard had apparently been able
to clear only about a hundred and fifty feet back–the area directly in front of the basilica–less than
one-third of the square. The shell of congestion encompassing the square was compacted now, those
at the safer distances pressing for a closer look, trapping the others inside. They are too close!
Vittoria thought. Much too close!
“I’m going back in,” Langdon said flatly.
Vittoria turned, incredulous. “Into the Vatican ?”
Langdon told her about the Samaritan, and how it was a ploy. The Illuminati leader, a man
named Janus, was actually coming himself to brand the camerlegno. A final Illuminati act of
domination.
“Nobody in Vatican City knows,” Langdon said. “I have no way to contact them, and this guy
is arriving any minute. I have to warn the guards before they let him in.”
“But you’ll never get through the crowd!”
Langdon’s voice was confident. “There’s a way. Trust me.”
Vittoria sensed once again that the historian knew something she did not. “I’m coming.”
“No. Why risk both–”
“I have to find a way to get those people out of there! They’re in incredible dange–”
Just then, the balcony they were standing on began to shake. A deafening rumble shook the
whole castle. Then a white light from the direction of St. Peter’s blinded them. Vittoria had only
one thought. Oh my God! The antimatter annihilated early!
But instead of an explosion, a huge cheer went up from the crowd. Vittoria squinted into the
light. It was a barrage of media lights from the square, now trained, it seemed, on them! Everyone
was turned their way, hollering and pointing. The rumble grew louder. The air in the square seemed
suddenly joyous.
Langdon looked baffled. “What the devil–”
The sky overhead roared.
Emerging from behind the tower, without warning, came the papal helicopter. It thundered
fifty feet above them, on a beeline for Vatican City. As it passed overhead, radiant in the media
lights, the castle trembled. The lights followed the helicopter as it passed by, and Langdon and
Vittoria were suddenly again in the dark.
Vittoria had the uneasy feeling they were too late as they watched the mammoth machine
slow to a stop over St. Peter’s Square. Kicking up a cloud of dust, the chopper dropped onto the
open portion of the square between the crowd and the basilica, touching down at the bottom of the
basilica’s staircase.
“Talk about an entrance,” Vittoria said. Against the white marble, she could see a tiny speck
of a person emerge from the Vatican and move toward the chopper. She would never have
recognized the figure except for the bright red beret on his head. “Red carpet greeting. That’s
Rocher.”
Langdon pounded his fist on the banister. “Somebody’s got to warn them!” He turned to go.
Vittoria caught his arm. “Wait!” She had just seen something else, something her eyes refused
to believe. Fingers trembling, she pointed toward the chopper. Even from this distance, there was no
mistaking. Descending the gangplank was another figure… a figure who moved so uniquely that it
could only be one man. Although the figure was seated, he accelerated across the open square with
effortless control and startling speed.
A king on an electric throne.
It was Maximilian Kohler.
111
Kohler was sickened by the opulence of the Hallway of the Belvedere. The gold leaf in the
ceiling alone probably could have funded a year’s worth of cancer research. Rocher led Kohler up a
handicapped ramp on a circuitous route into the Apostolic Palace.
“No elevator?” Kohler demanded.
“No power.” Rocher motioned to the candles burning around them in the darkened building.
“Part of our search tactic.”
“Tactics which no doubt failed.”
Rocher nodded.
Kohler broke into another coughing fit and knew it might be one of his last. It was not an
entirely unwelcome thought.
When they reached the top floor and started down the hallway toward the Pope’s office, four
Swiss Guards ran toward them, looking troubled. “Captain, what are you doing up here? I thought
this man had information that–”
“He will only speak to the camerlegno.”
The guards recoiled, looking suspicious.
“Tell the camerlegno,” Rocher said forcefully, “that the director of CERN, Maximilian
Kohler, is here to see him. Immediately.”
“Yes, sir!” One of the guards ran off in the direction of the camerlegno’s office. The others
stood their ground. They studied Rocher, looking uneasy. “Just one moment, captain. We will
announce your guest.”
Kohler, however, did not stop. He turned sharply and maneuvered his chair around the
sentinels.
The guards spun and broke into a jog beside him. “Fermati! Sir! Stop!”
Kohler felt repugnance for them. Not even the most elite security force in the world was
immune to the pity everyone felt for cripples. Had Kohler been a healthy man, the guards would
have tackled him. Cripples are powerless , Kohler thought. Or so the world believes .
Kohler knew he had very little time to accomplish what he had come for. He also knew he
might die here tonight. He was surprised how little he cared. Death was a price he was ready to pay.
He had endured too much in his life to have his work destroyed by someone like Camerlegno
Ventresca.
“Signore!” the guards shouted, running ahead and forming a line across the hallway. “You
must stop!” One of them pulled a sidearm and aimed it at Kohler.
Kohler stopped.
Rocher stepped in, looking contrite. “Mr. Kohler, please. It will only be a moment. No one
enters the Office of the Pope unannounced.”
Kohler could see in Rocher’s eyes that he had no choice but to wait. Fine , Kohler thought.
We wait .
The guards, cruelly it seemed, had stopped Kohler next to a full-length gilded mirror. The
sight of his own twisted form repulsed Kohler. The ancient rage brimmed yet again to the surface. It
empowered him. He was among the enemy now. These were the people who had robbed him of
his dignity. These were the people. Because of them he had never felt the touch of a woman… had
never stood tall to accept an award. What truth do these people possess? What proof, damn it! A
book of ancient fables? Promises of miracles to come? Science creates miracles every day!
Kohler stared a moment into his own stony eyes. Tonight I may die at the hands of religion ,
he thought. But it will not be the first time .
For a moment, he was eleven years old again, lying in his bed in his parents’ Frankfurt
mansion. The sheets beneath him were Europe’s finest linen, but they were soaked with sweat.
Young Max felt like he was on fire, the pain wracking his body unimaginable. Kneeling beside his
bed, where they had been for two days, were his mother and father. They were praying.
In the shadows stood three of Frankfurt’s best doctors.
“I urge you to reconsider!” one of the doctors said. “Look at the boy! His fever is increasing.
He is in terrible pain. And danger!”
But Max knew his mother’s reply before she even said it. “Gott wird ihn beschuetzen .”
Yes , Max thought. God will protect me . The conviction in his mother’s voice gave him
strength. God will protect me .
An hour later, Max felt like his whole body was being crushed beneath a car. He could not
even breathe to cry.
“Your son is in great suffering,” another doctor said. “Let me at least ease his pain. I have in
my bag a simple injection of–”
“Ruhe, bitte!” Max’s father silenced the doctor without ever opening his eyes. He simply kept
praying.
“Father, please!” Max wanted to scream. “Let them stop the pain!” But his words were lost in
a spasm of coughing.
An hour later, the pain had worsened.
“Your son could become paralyzed,” one of the doctors scolded. “Or even die! We have
medicines that will help!”
Frau and Herr Kohler would not allow it. They did not believe in medicine. Who were they to
interfere with God’s master plan? They prayed harder. After all, God had blessed them with this
boy, why would God take the child away? His mother whispered to Max to be strong. She
explained that God was testing him… like the Bible story of Abraham… a test of his faith.
Max tried to have faith, but the pain was excruciating.
“I cannot watch this!” one of the doctors finally said, running from the room.
By dawn, Max was barely conscious. Every muscle in his body spasmed in agony. Where is
Jesus? he wondered. Doesn’t he love me? Max felt the life slipping from his body.
His mother had fallen asleep at the bedside, her hands still clasped over him. Max’s father
stood across the room at the window staring out at the dawn. He seemed to be in a trance. Max
could hear the low mumble of his ceaseless prayers for mercy.
It was then that Max sensed the figure hovering over him. An angel? Max could barely see.
His eyes were swollen shut. The figure whispered in his ear, but it was not the voice of an angel.
Max recognized it as one of the doctors… the one who had sat in the corner for two days, never
leaving, begging Max’s parents to let him administer some new drug from England.
“I will never forgive myself,” the doctor whispered, “if I do not do this.” Then the doctor
gently took Max’s frail arm. “I wish I had done it sooner.”
Max felt a tiny prick in his arm–barely discernible through the pain.
Then the doctor quietly packed his things. Before he left, he put a hand on Max’s forehead.
“This will save your life. I have great faith in the power of medicine.”
Within minutes, Max felt as if some sort of magic spirit were flowing through his veins. The
warmth spread through his body numbing his pain. Finally, for the first time in days, Max slept.
When the fever broke, his mother and father proclaimed a miracle of God. But when it
became evident that their son was crippled, they became despondent. They wheeled their son into
the church and begged the priest for counseling.
“It was only by the grace of God,” the priest told them, “that this boy survived.”
Max listened, saying nothing.
“But our son cannot walk!” Frau Kohler was weeping.
The priest nodded sadly. “Yes. It seems God has punished him for not having enough faith.”
“Mr. Kohler?” It was the Swiss Guard who had run ahead. “The camerlegno says he will
grant you audience.”
Kohler grunted, accelerating again down the hall.
“He is surprised by your visit,” the guard said.
“I’m sure.” Kohler rolled on. “I would like to see him alone.”
“Impossible,” the guard said. “No one–”
“Lieutenant,” Rocher barked. “The meeting will be as Mr. Kohler wishes.”
The guard stared in obvious disbelief.
Outside the door to the Pope’s office, Rocher allowed his guards to take standard precautions
before letting Kohler in. Their handheld metal detector was rendered worthless by the myriad of
electronic devices on Kohler’s wheelchair. The guards frisked him but were obviously too ashamed
of his disability to do it properly. They never found the revolver affixed beneath his chair. Nor did
they relieve him of the other object… the one that Kohler knew would bring unforgettable closure
to this evening’s chain of events.
When Kohler entered the Pope’s office, Camerlegno Ventresca was alone, kneeling in prayer
beside a dying fire. He did not open his eyes.
“Mr. Kohler,” the camerlegno said. “Have you come to make me a martyr?”
112
All the while, the narrow tunnel called Il Passetto stretched out before Langdon and Vittoria
as they dashed toward Vatican City. The torch in Langdon’s hand threw only enough light to see a
few yards ahead. The walls were close on either side, and the ceiling low. The air smelled dank.
Langdon raced on into the darkness with Vittoria close at his heels.
The tunnel inclined steeply as it left the Castle St. Angelo, proceeding upward into the
underside of a stone bastion that looked like a Roman aqueduct. There, the tunnel leveled out and
began its secret course toward Vatican City.
As Langdon ran, his thoughts turned over and over in a kaleidoscope of confounding
images–Kohler, Janus, the Hassassin, Rocher… a sixth brand? I’m sure you’ve heard about the
sixth brand , the killer had said. The most brilliant of all . Langdon was quite certain he had not.
Even in conspiracy theory lore, Langdon could think of no references to any sixth brand. Real or
imagined. There were rumors of a gold bullion and a flawless Illuminati Diamond but never any
mention of a sixth brand.
“Kohler can’t be Janus!” Vittoria declared as they ran down the interior of the dike. “It’s
impossible!”
Impossible was one word Langdon had stopped using tonight. “I don’t know,” Langdon
yelled as they ran. “Kohler has a serious grudge, and he also has some serious influence.”
“This crisis has made CERN look like monsters! Max would never do anything to damage
CERN’s reputation!”
On one count, Langdon knew CERN had taken a public beating tonight, all because of the
Illuminati’s insistence on making this a public spectacle. And yet, he wondered how much CERN
had really been damaged. Criticism from the church was nothing new for CERN. In fact, the more
Langdon thought about it, the more he wondered if this crisis might actually benefit CERN. If
publicity were the game, then antimatter was the jackpot winner tonight. The entire planet was
talking about it.
“You know what promoter P. T. Barnum said,” Langdon called over his shoulder. “‘I don’t
care what you say about me, just spell my name right!’ I bet people are already secretly lining up to
license antimatter technology. And after they see its true power at midnight tonight…”
“Illogical,” Vittoria said. “Publicizing scientific breakthroughs is not about showing
destructive power! This is terrible for antimatter, trust me!”
Langdon’s torch was fading now. “Then maybe it’s all much simpler than that. Maybe Kohler
gambled that the Vatican would keep the antimatter a secret–refusing to empower the Illuminati by
confirming the weapon’s existence. Kohler expected the Vatican to be their usual tight-lipped selves
about the threat, but the camerlegno changed the rules.”
Vittoria was silent as they dashed down the tunnel.
Suddenly the scenario was making more sense to Langdon. “Yes! Kohler never counted on
the camerlegno’s reaction. The camerlegno broke the Vatican tradition of secrecy and went public
about the crisis. He was dead honest. He put the antimatter on TV, for God’s sake. It was a brilliant
response, and Kohler never expected it. And the irony of the whole thing is that the Illuminati attack
backfired. It inadvertently produced a new church leader in the camerlegno. And now Kohler is
coming to kill him!”
“Max is a bastard,” Vittoria declared, “but he is not a murderer. And he would never have
been involved in my father’s assassination.”
In Langdon’s mind, it was Kohler’s voice that answered. Leonardo was considered dangerous
by many purists at CERN . Fusing science and God is the ultimate scientific blasphemy . “Maybe
Kohler found out about the antimatter project weeks ago and didn’t like the religious implications.”
“So he killed my father over it? Ridiculous! Besides, Max Kohler would never have known
the project existed.”
“While you were gone, maybe your father broke down and consulted Kohler, asking for
guidance. You yourself said your father was concerned about the moral implications of creating
such a deadly substance.”
“Asking moral guidance from Maximilian Kohler?” Vittoria snorted. “I don’t think so!”
The tunnel banked slightly westward. The faster they ran, the dimmer Langdon’s torch
became. He began to fear what the place would look like if the light went out. Black.
“Besides,” Vittoria argued, “why would Kohler have bothered to call you in this morning and
ask for help if he is behind the whole thing?”
Langdon had already considered it. “By calling me, Kohler covered his bases. He made sure
no one would accuse him of nonaction in the face of crisis. He probably never expected us to get
this far.”
The thought of being used by Kohler incensed Langdon. Langdon’s involvement had given
the Illuminati a level of credibility. His credentials and publications had been quoted all night by the
media, and as ridiculous as it was, the presence of a Harvard professor in Vatican City had
somehow raised the whole emergency beyond the scope of paranoid delusion and convinced
skeptics around the world that the Illuminati brotherhood was not only a historical fact, but a force
to be reckoned with.
“That BBC reporter,” Langdon said, “thinks CERN is the new Illuminati lair.”
“What!” Vittoria stumbled behind him. She pulled herself up and ran on. “He said that!?”
“On air. He likened CERN to the Masonic lodges–an innocent organization unknowingly
harboring the Illuminati brotherhood within.”
“My God, this is going to destroy CERN.”
Langdon was not so sure. Either way, the theory suddenly seemed less far-fetched. CERN was
the ultimate scientific haven. It was home to scientists from over a dozen countries. They seemed to
have endless private funding. And Maximilian Kohler was their director.
Kohler is Janus .
“If Kohler’s not involved,” Langdon challenged, “then what is he doing here?”
“Probably trying to stop this madness. Show support. Maybe he really is acting as the
Samaritan! He could have found out who knew about the antimatter project and has come to share
information.”
“The killer said he was coming to brand the camerlegno.”
“Listen to yourself! It would be a suicide mission. Max would never get out alive.”
Langdon considered it. Maybe that was the point .
The outline of a steel gate loomed ahead, blocking their progress down the tunnel. Langdon’s
heart almost stopped. When they approached, however, they found the ancient lock hanging open.
The gate swung freely.
Langdon breathed a sigh of relief, realizing as he had suspected, that the ancient tunnel was in
use. Recently. As in today. He now had little doubt that four terrified cardinals had been secreted
through here earlier.
They ran on. Langdon could now hear the sounds of chaos to his left. It was St. Peter’s
Square. They were getting close.
They hit another gate, this one heavier. It too was unlocked. The sound of St. Peter’s Square
faded behind them now, and Langdon sensed they had passed through the outer wall of Vatican
City. He wondered where inside the Vatican this ancient passage would conclude. In the gardens?
In the basilica? In the papal residence?
Then, without warning, the tunnel ended.
The cumbrous door blocking their way was a thick wall of riveted iron. Even by the last
flickers of his torch, Langdon could see that the portal was perfectly smooth–no handles, no knobs,
no keyholes, no hinges. No entry.
He felt a surge of panic. In architect-speak, this rare kind of door was called a senza chiave –a
one-way portal, used for security, and only operable from one side–the other side. Langdon’s hope
dimmed to black… along with the torch in his hand.
He looked at his watch. Mickey glowed.
11:29 P.M.
With a scream of frustration, Langdon swung the torch and started pounding on the door.
113
Something was wrong.
Lieutenant Chartrand stood outside the Pope’s office and sensed in the uneasy stance of the
soldier standing with him that they shared the same anxiety. The private meeting they were
shielding, Rocher had said, could save the Vatican from destruction. So Chartrand wondered why
his protective instincts were tingling. And why was Rocher acting so strangely?
Something definitely was awry.
Captain Rocher stood to Chartrand’s right, staring dead ahead, his sharp gaze
uncharacteristically distant. Chartrand barely recognized the captain. Rocher had not been himself
in the last hour. His decisions made no sense.
Someone should be present inside this meeting! Chartrand thought. He had heard
Maximilian Kohler bolt the door after he entered. Why had Rocher permitted this?
But there was so much more bothering Chartrand. The cardinals . The cardinals were still
locked in the Sistine Chapel. This was absolute insanity. The camerlegno had wanted them
evacuated fifteen minutes ago! Rocher had overruled the decision and not informed the camerlegno.
Chartrand had expressed concern, and Rocher had almost taken off his head. Chain of command
was never questioned in the Swiss Guard, and Rocher was now top dog.
Half an hour , Rocher thought, discreetly checking his Swiss chronometer in the dim light of
the candelabra lighting the hall. Please hurry .
Chartrand wished he could hear what was happening on the other side of the doors. Still, he
knew there was no one he would rather have handling this crisis than the camerlegno. The man had
been tested beyond reason tonight, and he had not flinched. He had confronted the problem
head-on… truthful, candid, shining like an example to all. Chartrand felt proud right now to be a
Catholic. The Illuminati had made a mistake when they challenged Camerlegno Ventresca.
At that moment, however, Chartrand’s thoughts were jolted by an unexpected sound. A
banging. It was coming from down the hall. The pounding was distant and muffled, but incessant.
Rocher looked up. The captain turned to Chartrand and motioned down the hall. Chartrand
understood. He turned on his flashlight and took off to investigate.
The banging was more desperate now. Chartrand ran thirty yards down the corridor to an
intersection. The noise seemed to be coming from around the corner, beyond the Sala Clementina.
Chartrand felt perplexed. There was only one room back there–the Pope’s private library. His
Holiness’s private library had been locked since the Pope’s death. Nobody could possibly be in
there!
Chartrand hurried down the second corridor, turned another corner, and rushed to the library
door. The wooden portico was diminutive, but it stood in the dark like a dour sentinel. The banging
was coming from somewhere inside. Chartrand hesitated. He had never been inside the private
library. Few had. No one was allowed in without an escort by the Pope himself.
Tentatively, Chartrand reached for the doorknob and turned. As he had imagined, the door
was locked. He put his ear to the door. The banging was louder. Then he heard something else.
Voices! Someone calling out!
He could not make out the words, but he could hear the panic in their shouts. Was someone
trapped in the library? Had the Swiss Guard not properly evacuated the building? Chartrand
hesitated, wondering if he should go back and consult Rocher. The hell with that. Chartrand had
been trained to make decisions, and he would make one now. He pulled out his side arm and fired a
single shot into the door latch. The wood exploded, and the door swung open.
Beyond the threshold Chartrand saw nothing but blackness. He shone his flashlight. The room
was rectangular–oriental carpets, high oak shelves packed with books, a stitched leather couch, and
a marble fireplace. Chartrand had heard stories of this place–three thousand ancient volumes side by
side with hundreds of current magazines and periodicals, anything His Holiness requested. The
coffee table was covered with journals of science and politics.
The banging was clearer now. Chartrand shone his light across the room toward the sound. On
the far wall, beyond the sitting area, was a huge door made of iron. It looked impenetrable as a
vault. It had four mammoth locks. The tiny etched letters dead center of the door took Chartrand’s
breath away.
IL PASSETTO
Chartrand stared. The Pope’s secret escape route! Chartrand had certainly heard of Il
Passetto , and he had even heard rumors that it had once had an entrance here in the library, but the
tunnel had not been used in ages! Who could be banging on the other side?
Chartrand took his flashlight and rapped on the door. There was a muffled exultation from the
other side. The banging stopped, and the voices yelled louder. Chartrand could barely make out
their words through the barricade.
“… Kohler… lie… camerlegno…”
“Who is that?” Chartrand yelled.
“… ert Langdon… Vittoria Ve…”
Chartrand understood enough to be confused. I thought you were dead!
“… the door,” the voices yelled. “Open…!”
Chartrand looked at the iron barrier and knew he would need dynamite to get through there.
“Impossible!” he yelled. “Too thick!”
“… meeting… stop… erlegno… danger…”
Despite his training on the hazards of panic, Chartrand felt a sudden rush of fear at the last
few words. Had he understood correctly? Heart pounding, he turned to run back to the office. As he
turned, though, he stalled. His gaze had fallen to something on the door… something more shocking
even than the message coming from beyond it. Emerging from the keyholes of each of the door’s
massive locks were keys . Chartrand stared. The keys were here? He blinked in disbelief. The keys
to this door were supposed to be in a vault someplace! This passage was never used–not for
centuries!
Chartrand dropped his flashlight on the floor. He grabbed the first key and turned. The
mechanism was rusted and stiff, but it still worked. Someone had opened it recently. Chartrand
worked the next lock. And the next. When the last bolt slid aside, Chartrand pulled. The slab of iron
creaked open. He grabbed his light and shone it into the passage.
Robert Langdon and Vittoria Vetra looked like apparitions as they staggered into the library.
Both were ragged and tired, but they were very much alive.
“What is this!” Chartrand demanded. “What’s going on! Where did you come from?”
“Where’s Max Kohler?” Langdon demanded.
Chartrand pointed. “In a private meeting with the camer–”
Langdon and Vittoria pushed past him and ran down the darkened hall. Chartrand turned,
instinctively raising his gun at their backs. He quickly lowered it and ran after them. Rocher
apparently heard them coming, because as they arrived outside the Pope’s office, Rocher had spread
his legs in a protective stance and was leveling his gun at them. “Alt! ”
“The camerlegno is in danger!” Langdon yelled, raising his arms in surrender as he slid to a
stop. “Open the door! Max Kohler is going to kill the camerlegno!”
Rocher looked angry.
“Open the door!” Vittoria said. “Hurry!”
But it was too late.
From inside the Pope’s office came a bloodcurdling scream. It was the camerlegno.
114
The confrontation lasted only seconds.
Camerlegno Ventresca was still screaming when Chartrand stepped past Rocher and blew
open the door of the Pope’s office. The guards dashed in. Langdon and Vittoria ran in behind them.
The scene before them was staggering.
The chamber was lit only by candlelight and a dying fire. Kohler was near the fireplace,
standing awkwardly in front of his wheelchair. He brandished a pistol, aimed at the camerlegno,
who lay on the floor at his feet, writhing in agony. The camerlegno’s cassock was torn open, and his
bare chest was seared black. Langdon could not make out the symbol from across the room, but a
large, square brand lay on the floor near Kohler. The metal still glowed red.
Two of the Swiss Guards acted without hesitation. They opened fire. The bullets smashed into
Kohler’s chest, driving him backward. Kohler collapsed into his wheelchair, his chest gurgling
blood. His gun went skittering across the floor.
Langdon stood stunned in the doorway.
Vittoria seemed paralyzed. “Max…” she whispered.
The camerlegno, still twisting on the floor, rolled toward Rocher, and with the trancelike
terror of the early witch hunts, pointed his index finger at Rocher and yelled a single word.
“ILLUMINATUS!”
“You bastard,” Rocher said, running at him. “You sanctimonious bas–”
This time it was Chartrand who reacted on instinct, putting three bullets in Rocher’s back. The
captain fell face first on the tile floor and slid lifeless through his own blood. Chartrand and the
guards dashed immediately to the camerlegno, who lay clutching himself, convulsing in pain.
Both guards let out exclamations of horror when they saw the symbol seared on the
camerlegno’s chest. The second guard saw the brand upside down and immediately staggered
backward with fear in his eyes. Chartrand, looking equally overwhelmed by the symbol, pulled the
camerlegno’s torn cassock up over the burn, shielding it from view.
Langdon felt delirious as he moved across the room. Through a mist of insanity and violence,
he tried to make sense of what he was seeing. A crippled scientist, in a final act of symbolic
dominance, had flown into Vatican City and branded the church’s highest official. Some things are
worth dying for , the Hassassin had said. Langdon wondered how a handicapped man could
possibly have overpowered the camerlegno. Then again, Kohler had a gun. It doesn’t matter how he
did it! Kohler accomplished his mission!
Langdon moved toward the gruesome scene. The camerlegno was being attended, and
Langdon felt himself drawn toward the smoking brand on the floor near Kohler’s wheelchair. The
sixth brand? The closer Langdon got, the more confused he became. The brand seemed to be a
perfect square, quite large, and had obviously come from the sacred center compartment of the
chest in the Illuminati Lair. A sixth and final brand , the Hassassin had said. The most brilliant of all
.
Langdon knelt beside Kohler and reached for the object. The metal still radiated heat.
Grasping the wooden handle, Langdon picked it up. He was not sure what he expected to see, but it
most certainly was not this.
Langdon stared a long, confused moment. Nothing was making sense. Why had the guards
cried out in horror when they saw this? It was a square of meaningless squiggles. The most brilliant
of all? It was symmetrical, Langdon could tell as he rotated it in his hand, but it was gibberish.
When he felt a hand on his shoulder, Langdon looked up, expecting Vittoria. The hand,
however, was covered with blood. It belonged to Maximilian Kohler, who was reaching out from
his wheelchair.
Langdon dropped the brand and staggered to his feet. Kohler’s still alive!
Slumped in his wheelchair, the dying director was still breathing, albeit barely, sucking in
sputtering gasps. Kohler’s eyes met Langdon’s, and it was the same stony gaze that had greeted
Langdon at CERN earlier that day. The eyes looked even harder in death, the loathing and enmity
rising to the surface.
The scientist’s body quivered, and Langdon sensed he was trying to move. Everyone else in
the room was focused on the camerlegno, and Langdon wanted to call out, but he could not react.
He was transfixed by the intensity radiating from Kohler in these final seconds of his life. The
director, with tremulous effort, lifted his arm and pulled a small device off the arm of his
wheelchair. It was the size of a matchbox. He held it out, quivering. For an instant, Langdon feared
Kohler had a weapon. But it was something else.
“G-give…” Kohler’s final words were a gurgling whisper. “G-give this… to the m-media.”
Kohler collapsed motionless, and the device fell in his lap.
Shocked, Langdon stared at the device. It was electronic. The words SONY RUVI were
printed across the front. Langdon recognized it as one of those new ultraminiature, palm-held
camcorders. The balls on this guy! he thought. Kohler had apparently recorded some sort of final
suicide message he wanted the media to broadcast… no doubt some sermon about the importance
of science and the evils of religion. Langdon decided he had done enough for this man’s cause
tonight. Before Chartrand saw Kohler’s camcorder, Langdon slipped it into his deepest jacket
pocket. Kohler’s final message can rot in hell!
It was the voice of the camerlegno that broke the silence. He was trying to sit up. “The
cardinals,” he gasped to Chartrand.
“Still in the Sistine Chapel!” Chartrand exclaimed. “Captain Rocher ordered–”
“Evacuate… now. Everyone.”
Chartrand sent one of the other guards running off to let the cardinals out.
The camerlegno grimaced in pain. “Helicopter… out front… get me to a hospital.”
115
In St. Peter’s Square, the Swiss Guard pilot sat in the cockpit of the parked Vatican helicopter
and rubbed his temples. The chaos in the square around him was so loud that it drowned out the
sound of his idling rotors. This was no solemn candlelight vigil. He was amazed a riot had not
broken out yet.
With less than twenty-five minutes left until midnight, the people were still packed together,
some praying, some weeping for the church, others screaming obscenities and proclaiming that this
was what the church deserved, still others chanting apocalyptic Bible verses.
The pilot’s head pounded as the media lights glinted off his windshield. He squinted out at the
clamorous masses. Banners waved over the crowd.
Antimatter is the Antichrist!
Scientist=Satanist
Where is your God now?
The pilot groaned, his headache worsening. He half considered grabbing the windshield’s
vinyl covering and putting it up so he wouldn’t have to watch, but he knew he would be airborne in
a matter of minutes. Lieutenant Chartrand had just radioed with terrible news. The camerlegno had
been attacked by Maximilian Kohler and seriously injured. Chartrand, the American, and the
woman were carrying the camerlegno out now so he could be evacuated to a hospital.
The pilot felt personally responsible for the attack. He reprimanded himself for not acting on
his gut. Earlier, when he had picked up Kohler at the airport, he had sensed something in the
scientist’s dead eyes. He couldn’t place it, but he didn’t like it. Not that it mattered. Rocher was
running the show, and Rocher insisted this was the guy. Rocher had apparently been wrong.
A new clamor arose from the crowd, and the pilot looked over to see a line of cardinals
processing solemnly out of the Vatican onto St. Peter’s Square. The cardinals’ relief to be leaving
ground zero seemed to be quickly overcome by looks of bewilderment at the spectacle now going
on outside the church.
The crowd noise intensified yet again. The pilot’s head pounded. He needed an aspirin.
Maybe three. He didn’t like to fly on medication, but a few aspirin would certainly be less
debilitating than this raging headache. He reached for the first-aid kit, kept with assorted maps and
manuals in a cargo box bolted between the two front seats. When he tried to open the box, though,
he found it locked. He looked around for the key and then finally gave up. Tonight was clearly not
his lucky night. He went back to massaging his temples.
Inside the darkened basilica, Langdon, Vittoria, and the two guards strained breathlessly
toward the main exit. Unable to find anything more suitable, the four of them were transporting the
wounded camerlegno on a narrow table, balancing the inert body between them as though on a
stretcher. Outside the doors, the faint roar of human chaos was now audible. The camerlegno
teetered on the brink of unconsciousness.
Time was running out .
116
It was 11:39 P.M. when Langdon stepped with the others from St. Peter’s Basilica. The glare
that hit his eyes was searing. The media lights shone off the white marble like sunlight off a snowy
tundra. Langdon squinted, trying to find refuge behind the façade’s enormous columns, but the light
came from all directions. In front of him, a collage of massive video screens rose above the crowd.
Standing there atop the magnificent stairs that spilled down to the piazza below, Langdon felt
like a reluctant player on the world’s biggest stage. Somewhere beyond the glaring lights, Langdon
heard an idling helicopter and the roar of a hundred thousand voices. To their left, a procession of
cardinals was now evacuating onto the square. They all stopped in apparent distress to see the scene
now unfolding on the staircase.
“Careful now,” Chartrand urged, sounding focused as the group began descending the stairs
toward the helicopter.
Langdon felt like they were moving underwater. His arms ached from the weight of the
camerlegno and the table. He wondered how the moment could get much less dignified. Then he
saw the answer. The two BBC reporters had apparently been crossing the open square on their way
back to the press area. But now, with the roar of the crowd, they had turned. Glick and Macri were
now running back toward them. Macri’s camera was raised and rolling. Here come the vultures ,
Langdon thought.
“Alt!” Chartrand yelled. “Get back!”
But the reporters kept coming. Langdon guessed the other networks would take about six
seconds to pick up this live BBC feed again. He was wrong. They took two. As if connected by
some sort of universal consciousness, every last media screen in the piazza cut away from their
countdown clocks and their Vatican experts and began transmitting the same picture–a jiggling
action footage swooping up the Vatican stairs. Now, everywhere Langdon looked, he saw the
camerlegno’s limp body in a Technicolor close-up.
This is wrong! Langdon thought. He wanted to run down the stairs and interfere, but he
could not. It wouldn’t have helped anyway. Whether it was the roar of the crowd or the cool night
air that caused it, Langdon would never know, but at that moment, the inconceivable occurred.
Like a man awakening from a nightmare, the camerlegno’s eyes shot open and he sat bolt
upright. Taken entirely by surprise, Langdon and the others fumbled with the shifting weight. The
front of the table dipped. The camerlegno began to slide. They tried to recover by setting the table
down, but it was too late. The camerlegno slid off the front. Incredibly, he did not fall. His feet hit
the marble, and he swayed upright. He stood a moment, looking disoriented, and then, before
anyone could stop him, he lurched forward, staggering down the stairs toward Macri.
“No!” Langdon screamed.
Chartrand rushed forward, trying to reign in the camerlegno. But the camerlegno turned on
him, wild-eyed, crazed. “Leave me!”
Chartrand jumped back.
The scene went from bad to worse. The camerlegno’s torn cassock, having been only laid
over his chest by Chartrand, began to slip lower. For a moment, Langdon thought the garment
might hold, but that moment passed. The cassock let go, sliding off his shoulders down around his
waist.
The gasp that went up from the crowd seemed to travel around the globe and back in an
instant. Cameras rolled, flashbulbs exploded. On media screens everywhere, the image of the
camerlegno’s branded chest was projected, towering and in grisly detail. Some screens were even
freezing the image and rotating it 180 degrees.
The ultimate Illuminati victory .
Langdon stared at the brand on the screens. Although it was the imprint of the square brand he
had held earlier, the symbol now made sense. Perfect sense. The marking’s awesome power hit
Langdon like a train.
Orientation. Langdon had forgotten the first rule of symbology. When is a square not a
square? He had also forgotten that iron brands, just like rubber stamps, never looked like their
imprints. They were in reverse. Langdon had been looking at the brand’s negative !
As the chaos grew, an old Illuminati quote echoed with new meaning: “A flawless diamond,
born of the ancient elements with such perfection that all those who saw it could only stare in
wonder.”
Langdon knew now the myth was true.
Earth, Air, Fire, Water.
The Illuminati Diamond .
117
Robert Langdon had little doubt that the chaos and hysteria coursing through St. Peter’s
Square at this very instant exceeded anything Vatican Hill had ever witnessed. No battle, no
crucifixion, no pilgrimage, no mystical vision… nothing in the shrine’s 2,000-year history could
possibly match the scope and drama of this very moment.
As the tragedy unfolded, Langdon felt oddly separate, as if hovering there beside Vittoria at
the top of the stairs. The action seemed to distend, as if in a time warp, all the insanity slowing to a
crawl…
The branded camerlegno… raving for the world to see…
The Illuminati Diamond… unveiled in its diabolical genius…
The countdown clock registering the final twenty minutes of Vatican history…
The drama, however, had only just begun.
The camerlegno, as if in some sort of post-traumatic trance, seemed suddenly puissant,
possessed by demons. He began babbling, whispering to unseen spirits, looking up at the sky and
raising his arms to God.
“Speak!” the camerlegno yelled to the heavens. “Yes, I hear you!”
In that moment, Langdon understood. His heart dropped like a rock.
Vittoria apparently understood too. She went white. “He’s in shock,” she said. “He’s
hallucinating. He thinks he’s talking to God!”
Somebody’s got to stop this , Langdon thought. It was a wretched and embarrassing end. Get
this man to a hospital!
Below them on the stairs, Chinita Macri was poised and filming, apparently having located
her ideal vantage point. The images she filmed appeared instantly across the square behind her on
media screens… like endless drive-in movies all playing the same grisly tragedy.
The whole scene felt epic. The camerlegno, in his torn cassock, with the scorched brand on
his chest, looked like some sort of battered champion who had overcome the rings of hell for this
one moment of revelation. He bellowed to the heavens.
“Ti sento, Dio! I hear you, God!”
Chartrand backed off, a look of awe on his face.
The hush that fell across the crowd was instant and absolute. For a moment it was as if the
silence had fallen across the entire planet… everyone in front of their TVs rigid, a communal
holding of breath.
The camerlegno stood on the stairs, before the world, and held out his arms. He looked almost
Christlike, bare and wounded before the world. He raised his arms to the heavens and, looking up,
exclaimed, “Grazie! Grazie, Dio! ”
The silence of the masses never broke.
“Grazie, Dio!” the camerlegno cried out again. Like the sun breaking through a stormy sky, a
look of joy spread across his face. “Grazie, Dio! ”
Thank you, God? Langdon stared in wonder.
The camerlegno was radiant now, his eerie transformation complete. He looked up at the sky,
still nodding furiously. He shouted to the heavens, “Upon this rock I will build my church!”
Langdon knew the words, but he had no idea why the camerlegno could possibly be shouting
them.
The camerlegno turned back to the crowd and bellowed again into the night. “Upon this rock I
will build my church!” Then he raised his hands to the sky and laughed out loud. “Grazie, Dio!
Grazie! ”
The man had clearly gone mad.
The world watched, spellbound.
The culmination, however, was something no one expected.
With a final joyous exultation, the camerlegno turned and dashed back into St. Peter’s
Basilica.
118
Eleven-forty-two P.M.
The frenzied convoy that plunged back into the basilica to retrieve the camerlegno was not
one Langdon had ever imagined he would be part of… much less leading. But he had been closest
to the door and had acted on instinct.
He’ll die in here , Langdon thought, sprinting over the threshold into the darkened void.
“Camerlegno! Stop!”
The wall of blackness that hit Langdon was absolute. His pupils were contracted from the
glare outside, and his field of vision now extended no farther than a few feet before his face. He
skidded to a stop. Somewhere in the blackness ahead, he heard the camerlegno’s cassock rustle as
the priest ran blindly into the abyss.
Vittoria and the guards arrived immediately. Flashlights came on, but the lights were almost
dead now and did not even begin to probe the depths of the basilica before them. The beams swept
back and forth, revealing only columns and bare floor. The camerlegno was nowhere to be seen.
“Camerlegno!” Chartrand yelled, fear in his voice. “Wait! Signore!”
A commotion in the doorway behind them caused everyone to turn. Chinita Macri’s large
frame lurched through the entry. Her camera was shouldered, and the glowing red light on top
revealed that it was still transmitting. Glick was running behind her, microphone in hand, yelling for
her to slow down.
Langdon could not believe these two. This is not the time!
“Out!” Chartrand snapped. “This is not for your eyes!”
But Macri and Glick kept coming.
“Chinita!” Glick sounded fearful now. “This is suicide! I’m not coming!”
Macri ignored him. She threw a switch on her camera. The spotlight on top glared to life,
blinding everyone.
Langdon shielded his face and turned away in pain. Damn it! When he looked up, though,
the church around them was illuminated for thirty yards.
At that moment the camerlegno’s voice echoed somewhere in the distance. “Upon this rock I
will build my church!”
Macri wheeled her camera toward the sound. Far off, in the grayness at the end of the
spotlight’s reach, black fabric billowed, revealing a familiar form running down the main aisle of
the basilica.
There was a fleeting instant of hesitation as everyone’s eyes took in the bizarre image. Then
the dam broke. Chartrand pushed past Langdon and sprinted after the camerlegno. Langdon took off
next. Then the guards and Vittoria.
Macri brought up the rear, lighting everyone’s way and transmitting the sepulchral chase to
the world. An unwilling Glick cursed aloud as he tagged along, fumbling through a terrified
blow-by-blow commentary.
The main aisle of St. Peter’s Basilica, Lieutenant Chartrand had once figured out, was longer
than an Olympic soccer field. Tonight, however, it felt like twice that. As the guard sprinted after
the camerlegno, he wondered where the man was headed. The camerlegno was clearly in shock,
delirious no doubt from his physical trauma and bearing witness to the horrific massacre in the
Pope’s office.
Somewhere up ahead, beyond the reach of the BBC spotlight, the camerlegno’s voice rang out
joyously. “Upon this rock I will build my church!”
Chartrand knew the man was shouting Scripture–Matthew 16:18, if Chartrand recalled
correctly. Upon this rock I will build my church . It was an almost cruelly inapt inspiration–the
church was about to be destroyed. Surely the camerlegno had gone mad.
Or had he?
For a fleeting instant, Chartrand’s soul fluttered. Holy visions and divine messages had
always seemed like wishful delusions to him–the product of overzealous minds hearing what they
wanted to hear–God did not interact directly !
A moment later, though, as if the Holy Spirit Himself had descended to persuade Chartrand of
His power, Chartrand had a vision.
Fifty yards ahead, in the center of the church, a ghost appeared… a diaphanous, glowing
outline. The pale shape was that of the half-naked camerlegno. The specter seemed transparent,
radiating light. Chartrand staggered to a stop, feeling a knot tighten in his chest. The camerlegno is
glowing! The body seemed to shine brighter now. Then, it began to sink… deeper and deeper,
until it disappeared as if by magic into the blackness of the floor.
Langdon had seen the phantom also. For a moment, he too thought he had witnessed a
magical vision. But as he passed the stunned Chartrand and ran toward the spot where the
camerlegno had disappeared, he realized what had just happened. The camerlegno had arrived at the
Niche of the Palliums–the sunken chamber lit by ninety-nine oil lamps. The lamps in the niche
shone up from beneath, illuminating him like a ghost. Then, as the camerlegno descended the stairs
into the light, he had seemed to disappear beneath the floor.
Langdon arrived breathless at the rim overlooking the sunken room. He peered down the
stairs. At the bottom, lit by the golden glow of oil lamps, the camerlegno dashed across the marble
chamber toward the set of glass doors that led to the room holding the famous golden box.
What is he doing? Langdon wondered. Certainly he can’t think the golden box –
The camerlegno yanked open the doors and ran inside. Oddly though, he totally ignored the
golden box, rushing right past it. Five feet beyond the box, he dropped to his knees and began
struggling to lift an iron grate embedded in the floor.
Langdon watched in horror, now realizing where the camerlegno was headed. Good God, no!
He dashed down the stairs after him. “Father! Don’t!”
As Langdon opened the glass doors and ran toward the camerlegno, he saw the camerlegno
heave on the grate. The hinged, iron bulkhead fell open with a deafening crash, revealing a narrow
shaft and a steep stairway that dropped into nothingness. As the camerlegno moved toward the hole,
Langdon grabbed his bare shoulders and pulled him back. The man’s skin was slippery with sweat,
but Langdon held on.
The camerlegno wheeled, obviously startled. “What are you doing!”
Langdon was surprised when their eyes met. The camerlegno no longer had the glazed look of
a man in a trance. His eyes were keen, glistening with a lucid determination. The brand on his chest
looked excruciating.
“Father,” Langdon urged, as calmly as possible, “you can’t go down there. We need to
evacuate.”
“My son,” the camerlegno said, his voice eerily sane. “I have just had a message. I know–”
“Camerlegno!” It was Chartrand and the others. They came dashing down the stairs into the
room, lit by Macri’s camera.
When Chartrand saw the open grate in the floor, his eyes filled with dread. He crossed himself
and shot Langdon a thankful look for having stopped the camerlegno. Langdon understood; had
read enough about Vatican architecture to know what lay beneath that grate. It was the most sacred
place in all of Christendom. Terra Santa . Holy Ground. Some called it the Necropolis. Some called
it the Catacombs. According to accounts from the select few clergy who had descended over the
years, the Necropolis was a dark maze of subterranean crypts that could swallow a visitor whole if
he lost his way. It was not the kind of place through which they wanted to be chasing the
camerlegno.
“Signore,” Chartrand pleaded. “You’re in shock. We need to leave this place. You cannot go
down there. It’s suicide.”
The camerlegno seemed suddenly stoic. He reached out and put a quiet hand on Chartrand’s
shoulder. “Thank you for your concern and service. I cannot tell you how. I cannot tell you I
understand. But I have had a revelation. I know where the antimatter is.”
Everyone stared.
The camerlegno turned to the group. “Upon this rock I will build my church. That was the
message. The meaning is clear.”
Langdon was still unable to comprehend the camerlegno’s conviction that he had spoken to
God, much less that he had deciphered the message. Upon this rock I will build my church? They
were the words spoken by Jesus when he chose Peter as his first apostle. What did they have to do
with anything?
Macri moved in for a closer shot. Glick was mute, as if shell-shocked.
The camerlegno spoke quickly now. “The Illuminati have placed their tool of destruction on
the very cornerstone of this church. At the foundation.” He motioned down the stairs. “On the very
rock upon which this church was built. And I know where that rock is.”
Langdon was certain the time had come to overpower the camerlegno and carry him off. As
lucid as he seemed, the priest was talking nonsense. A rock? The cornerstone in the foundation?
The stairway before them didn’t lead to the foundation, it led to the necropolis! “The quote is a
metaphor, Father! There is no actual rock !”
The camerlegno looked strangely sad. “There is a rock, my son.” He pointed into the hole.
“Pietro è la pietra .”
Langdon froze. In an instant it all came clear.
The austere simplicity of it gave him chills. As Langdon stood there with the others, staring
down the long staircase, he realized that there was indeed a rock buried in the darkness beneath this
church.
Pietro è la pietra . Peter is the rock.
Peter’s faith in God was so steadfast that Jesus called Peter “the rock”–the unwavering
disciple on whose shoulders Jesus would build his church. On this very location, Langdon
realized–Vatican Hill–Peter had been crucified and buried. The early Christians built a small shrine
over his tomb. As Christianity spread, the shrine got bigger, layer upon layer, culminating in this
colossal basilica. The entire Catholic faith had been built, quite literally, upon St. Peter. The rock.
“The antimatter is on St. Peter’s tomb,” the camerlegno said, his voice crystalline.
Despite the seemingly supernatural origin of the information, Langdon sensed a stark logic in
it. Placing the antimatter on St. Peter’s tomb seemed painfully obvious now. The Illuminati, in an
act of symbolic defiance, had located the antimatter at the core of Christendom, both literally and
figuratively. The ultimate infiltration .
“And if you all need worldly proof,” the camerlegno said, sounding impatient now, “I just
found that grate unlocked.” He pointed to the open bulkhead in the floor. “It is never unlocked.
Someone has been down there… recently .”
Everyone stared into the hole.
An instant later, with deceptive agility, the camerlegno spun, grabbed an oil lamp, and headed
for the opening.
119
The stone steps declined steeply into the earth.
I’m going to die down here , Vittoria thought, gripping the heavy rope banister as she
bounded down the cramped passageway behind the others. Although Langdon had made a move to
stop the camerlegno from entering the shaft, Chartrand had intervened, grabbing Langdon and
holding on. Apparently, the young guard was now convinced the camerlegno knew what he was
doing.
After a brief scuffle, Langdon had freed himself and pursued the camerlegno with Chartrand
close on his heels. Instinctively, Vittoria had dashed after them.
Now she was racing headlong down a precipitous grade where any misplaced step could mean
a deadly fall. Far below, she could see the golden glow of the camerlegno’s oil lamp. Behind her,
Vittoria could hear the BBC reporters hurrying to keep up. The camera spotlight threw gnarled
shadows beyond her down the shaft, illuminating Chartrand and Langdon. Vittoria could scarcely
believe the world was bearing witness to this insanity. Turn off the damn camera! Then again, she
knew the light was the only reason any of them could see where they were going.
As the bizarre chase continued, Vittoria’s thoughts whipped like a tempest. What could the
camerlegno possibly do down here? Even if he found the antimatter? There was no time!
Vittoria was surprised to find her intuition now telling her the camerlegno was probably right.
Placing the antimatter three stories beneath the earth seemed an almost noble and merciful choice.
Deep underground–much as in Z-lab–an antimatter annihilation would be partially contained. There
would be no heat blast, no flying shrapnel to injure onlookers, just a biblical opening of the earth
and a towering basilica crumbling into a crater.
Was this Kohler’s one act of decency? Sparing lives? Vittoria still could not fathom the
director’s involvement. She could accept his hatred of religion… but this awesome conspiracy
seemed beyond him. Was Kohler’s loathing really this profound? Destruction of the Vatican?
Hiring an assassin? The murders of her father, the Pope, and four cardinals? It seemed unthinkable.
And how had Kohler managed all this treachery within the Vatican walls? Rocher was Kohler’s
inside man , Vittoria told herself. Rocher was an Illuminatus . No doubt Captain Rocher had keys to
everything–the Pope’s chambers, Il Passetto , the Necropolis, St. Peter’s tomb, all of it. He could
have placed the antimatter on St. Peter’s tomb–a highly restricted locale–and then commanded his
guards not to waste time searching the Vatican’s restricted areas. Rocher knew nobody would ever
find the canister.
But Rocher never counted on the camerlegno’s message from above .
The message. This was the leap of faith Vittoria was still struggling to accept. Had God
actually communicated with the camerlegno? Vittoria’s gut said no, and yet hers was the science
of entanglement physics–the study of interconnectedness. She witnessed miraculous
communications every day–twin sea-turtle eggs separated and placed in labs thousands of miles
apart hatching at the same instant… acres of jellyfish pulsating in perfect rhythm as if of a single
mind. There are invisible lines of communication everywhere , she thought.
But between God and man?
Vittoria wished her father were there to give her faith. He had once explained divine
communication to her in scientific terms, and he had made her believe. She still remembered the
day she had seen him praying and asked him, “Father, why do you bother to pray? God cannot
answer you.”
Leonardo Vetra had looked up from his meditations with a paternal smile. “My daughter the
skeptic. So you don’t believe God speaks to man? Let me put it in your language.” He took a model
of the human brain down from a shelf and set it in front of her. “As you probably know, Vittoria,
human beings normally use a very small percentage of their brain power. However, if you put them
in emotionally charged situations–like physical trauma, extreme joy or fear, deep meditation–all of
a sudden their neurons start firing like crazy, resulting in massively enhanced mental clarity.”
“So what?” Vittoria said. “Just because you think clearly doesn’t mean you talk to God.”
“Aha!” Vetra exclaimed. “And yet remarkable solutions to seemingly impossible problems
often occur in these moments of clarity. It’s what gurus call higher consciousness. Biologists call it
altered states. Psychologists call it super-sentience.” He paused. “And Christians call it answered
prayer.” Smiling broadly, he added, “Sometimes, divine revelation simply means adjusting your
brain to hear what your heart already knows.”
Now, as she dashed down, headlong into the dark, Vittoria sensed perhaps her father was
right. Was it so hard to believe that the camerlegno’s trauma had put his mind in a state where he
had simply “realized” the antimatter’s location?
Each of us is a God , Buddha had said. Each of us knows all . We need only open our minds to
hear our own wisdom .
It was in that moment of clarity, as Vittoria plunged deeper into the earth, that she felt her
own mind open… her own wisdom surface. She sensed now without a doubt what the camerlegno’s
intentions were. Her awareness brought with it a fear like nothing she had ever known.
“Camerlegno, no!” she shouted down the passage. “You don’t understand!” Vittoria pictured
the multitudes of people surrounding Vatican City, and her blood ran cold. “If you bring the
antimatter up… everyone will die !”
Langdon was leaping three steps at a time now, gaining ground. The passage was cramped,
but he felt no claustrophobia. His once debilitating fear was overshadowed by a far deeper dread.
“Camerlegno!” Langdon felt himself closing the gap on the lantern’s glow. “You must leave
the antimatter where it is! There’s no other choice!”
Even as Langdon spoke the words, he could not believe them. Not only had he accepted the
camerlegno’s divine revelation of the antimatter’s location, but he was lobbying for the destruction
of St. Peter’s Basilica–one of the greatest architectural feats on earth… as well as all of the art
inside.
But the people outside… it’s the only way .
It seemed a cruel irony that the only way to save the people now was to destroy the church.
Langdon figured the Illuminati were amused by the symbolism.
The air coming up from the bottom of the tunnel was cool and dank. Somewhere down here
was the sacred necropolis … burial place of St. Peter and countless other early Christians. Langdon
felt a chill, hoping this was not a suicide mission.
Suddenly, the camerlegno’s lantern seemed to halt. Langdon closed on him fast.
The end of the stairs loomed abruptly from out of the shadows. A wrought-iron gate with
three embossed skulls blocked the bottom of the stairs. The camerlegno was there, pulling the gate
open. Langdon leapt, pushing the gate shut, blocking the camerlegno’s way. The others came
thundering down the stairs, everyone ghostly white in the BBC spotlight… especially Glick , who
was looking more pasty with every step.
Chartrand grabbed Langdon. “Let the camerlegno pass!”
“No!” Vittoria said from above, breathless. “We must evacuate right now! You cannot take
the antimatter out of here! If you bring it up, everyone outside will die !”
The camerlegno’s voice was remarkably calm. “All of you… we must trust. We have little
time.”
“You don’t understand,” Vittoria said. “An explosion at ground level will be much worse than
one down here!”
The camerlegno looked at her, his green eyes resplendently sane. “Who said anything about
an explosion at ground level?”
Vittoria stared. “You’re leaving it down here?”
The camerlegno’s certitude was hypnotic. “There will be no more death tonight.”
“Father, but–”
“Please… some faith .” The camerlegno’s voice plunged to a compelling hush. “I am not
asking anyone to join me. You are all free to go. All I am asking is that you not interfere with His
bidding. Let me do what I have been called to do.” The camerlegno’s stare intensified. “I am to save
this church. And I can . I swear on my life.”
The silence that followed might as well have been thunder.
120
Eleven-fifty-one P.M.
Necropolis literally means City of the Dead .
Nothing Robert Langdon had ever read about this place prepared him for the sight of it. The
colossal subterranean hollow was filled with crumbling mausoleums, like small houses on the floor
of a cave. The air smelled lifeless. An awkward grid of narrow walkways wound between the
decaying memorials, most of which were fractured brick with marble platings. Like columns of
dust, countless pillars of unexcavated earth rose up, supporting a dirt sky, which hung low over the
penumbral hamlet.
City of the dead , Langdon thought, feeling trapped between academic wonder and raw fear.
He and the others dashed deeper down the winding passages. Did I make the wrong choice?
Chartrand had been the first to fall under the camerlegno’s spell, yanking open the gate and
declaring his faith in the camerlegno. Glick and Macri, at the camerlegno’s suggestion, had nobly
agreed to provide light to the quest, although considering what accolades awaited them if they got
out of here alive, their motivations were certainly suspect. Vittoria had been the least eager of all,
and Langdon had seen in her eyes a wariness that looked, unsettlingly, a lot like female intuition.
It’s too late now , he thought, he and Vittoria dashing after the others. We’re committed .
Vittoria was silent, but Langdon knew they were thinking the same thing. Nine minutes is not
enough time to get the hell out of Vatican City if the camerlegno is wrong .
As they ran on through the mausoleums, Langdon felt his legs tiring, noting to his surprise
that the group was ascending a steady incline. The explanation, when it dawned on him, sent shivers
to his core. The topography beneath his feet was that of Christ’s time. He was running up the
original Vatican Hill! Langdon had heard Vatican scholars claim that St. Peter’s tomb was near the
top of Vatican Hill, and he had always wondered how they knew. Now he understood. The damn
hill is still here!
Langdon felt like he was running through the pages of history. Somewhere ahead was St.
Peter’s tomb–the Christian relic. It was hard to imagine that the original grave had been marked
only with a modest shrine. Not any more. As Peter’s eminence spread, new shrines were built on
top of the old, and now, the homage stretched 440 feet overhead to the top of Michelangelo’s dome,
the apex positioned directly over the original tomb within a fraction of an inch.
They continued ascending the sinuous passages. Langdon checked his watch. Eight minutes .
He was beginning to wonder if he and Vittoria would be joining the deceased here permanently.
“Look out!” Glick yelled from behind them. “Snake holes!”
Langdon saw it in time. A series of small holes riddled the path before them. He leapt, just
clearing them.
Vittoria jumped too, barely avoiding the narrow hollows. She looked uneasy as they ran on.
“Snake holes?”
“Snack holes, actually,” Langdon corrected. “Trust me, you don’t want to know.” The holes,
he had just realized, were libation tubes . The early Christians had believed in the resurrection of
the flesh, and they’d used the holes to literally “feed the dead” by pouring milk and honey into
crypts beneath the floor.
The camerlegno felt weak.
He dashed onward, his legs finding strength in his duty to God and man. Almost there . He
was in incredible pain. The mind can bring so much more pain than the body . Still he felt tired. He
knew he had precious little time.
“I will save your church, Father. I swear it.”
Despite the BBC lights behind him, for which he was grateful, the camerlegno carried his oil
lamp high. I am a beacon in the darkness . I am the light . The lamp sloshed as he ran, and for an
instant he feared the flammable oil might spill and burn him. He had experienced enough burned
flesh for one evening.
As he approached the top of the hill, he was drenched in sweat, barely able to breathe. But
when he emerged over the crest, he felt reborn. He staggered onto the flat piece of earth where he
had stood many times. Here the path ended. The necropolis came to an abrupt halt at a wall of earth.
A tiny marker read: Mausoleum S .
La tomba di San Pietro .
Before him, at waist level, was an opening in the wall. There was no gilded plaque here. No
fanfare. Just a simple hole in the wall, beyond which lay a small grotto and a meager, crumbling
sarcophagus. The camerlegno gazed into the hole and smiled in exhaustion. He could hear the
others coming up the hill behind him. He set down his oil lamp and knelt to pray.
Thank you, God. It is almost over .
Outside in the square, surrounded by astounded cardinals, Cardinal Mortati stared up at the
media screen and watched the drama unfold in the crypt below. He no longer knew what to believe.
Had the entire world just witnessed what he had seen? Had God truly spoken to the camerlegno?
Was the antimatter really going to appear on St. Peter’s–
“Look!” A gasp went up from the throngs.
“There!” Everyone was suddenly pointing at the screen. “It’s a miracle!”
Mortati looked up. The camera angle was unsteady, but it was clear enough. The image was
unforgettable.
Filmed from behind, the camerlegno was kneeling in prayer on the earthen floor. In front of
him was a rough-hewn hole in the wall. Inside the hollow, among the rubble of ancient stone, was a
terra cotta casket. Although Mortati had seen the coffin only once in his life, he knew beyond a
doubt what it contained.
San Pietro .
Mortati was not naive enough to think that the shouts of joy and amazement now thundering
through the crowd were exaltations from bearing witness to one of Christianity’s most sacred relics.
St. Peter’s tomb was not what had people falling to their knees in spontaneous prayer and
thanksgiving. It was the object on top of his tomb.
The antimatter canister. It was there… where it had been all day… hiding in the darkness of
the Necropolis. Sleek. Relentless. Deadly. The camerlegno’s revelation was correct.
Mortati stared in wonder at the transparent cylinder. The globule of liquid still hovered at its
core. The grotto around the canister blinked red as the LED counted down into its final five minutes
of life.
Also sitting on the tomb, inches away from the canister, was the wireless Swiss Guard
security camera that had been pointed at the canister and transmitting all along.
Mortati crossed himself, certain this was the most frightful image he had seen in his entire
life. He realized, a moment later, however, that it was about to get worse.
The camerlegno stood suddenly. He grabbed the antimatter in his hands and wheeled toward
the others. His face showing total focus. He pushed past the others and began descending the
Necropolis the way he had come, running down the hill.
The camera caught Vittoria Vetra, frozen in terror. “Where are you going! Camerlegno! I
thought you said–”
“Have faith!” he exclaimed as he ran off.
Vittoria spun toward Langdon. “What do we do?”
Robert Langdon tried to stop the camerlegno, but Chartrand was running interference now,
apparently trusting the camerlegno’s conviction.
The picture coming from the BBC camera was like a roller coaster ride now, winding,
twisting. Fleeting freeze-frames of confusion and terror as the chaotic cortege stumbled through the
shadows back toward the Necropolis entrance.
Out in the square, Mortati let out a fearful gasp. “Is he bringing that up here ?”
On televisions all over the world, larger than life, the camerlegno raced upward out of the
Necropolis with the antimatter before him. “There will be no more death tonight!”
But the camerlegno was wrong.
121
The camerlegno erupted through the doors of St. Peter’s Basilica at exactly 11:56 P.M. He
staggered into the dazzling glare of the world spotlight, carrying the antimatter before him like
some sort of numinous offering. Through burning eyes he could see his own form, half-naked and
wounded, towering like a giant on the media screens around the square. The roar that went up from
the crowd in St. Peter’s Square was like none the camerlegno had ever heard–crying, screaming,
chanting, praying… a mix of veneration and terror.
Deliver us from evil , he whispered.
He felt totally depleted from his race out of the Necropolis. It had almost ended in disaster.
Robert Langdon and Vittoria Vetra had wanted to intercept him, to throw the canister back into its
subterranean hiding place, to run outside for cover. Blind fools!
The camerlegno realized now, with fearful clarity, that on any other night, he would never
have won the race. Tonight, however, God again had been with him. Robert Langdon, on the verge
of overtaking the camerlegno, had been grabbed by Chartrand, ever trusting and dutiful to the
camerlegno’s demands for faith. The reporters, of course, were spellbound and lugging too much
equipment to interfere.
The Lord works in mysterious ways .
The camerlegno could hear the others behind him now… see them on the screens, closing in.
Mustering the last of his physical strength, he raised the antimatter high over his head. Then,
throwing back his bare shoulders in an act of defiance to the Illuminati brand on his chest, he
dashed down the stairs.
There was one final act.
Godspeed , he thought. Godspeed .
Four minutes…
Langdon could barely see as he burst out of the basilica. Again the sea of media lights bore
into his retinas. All he could make out was the murky outline of the camerlegno, directly ahead of
him, running down the stairs. For an instant, refulgent in his halo of media lights, the camerlegno
looked celestial, like some kind of modern deity. His cassock was at his waist like a shroud. His
body was scarred and wounded by the hands of his enemies, and still he endured. The camerlegno
ran on, standing tall, calling out to the world to have faith, running toward the masses carrying this
weapon of destruction.
Langdon ran down the stairs after him. What is he doing? He will kill them all!
“Satan’s work,” the camerlegno screamed, “has no place in the House of God!” He ran on
toward a now terrified crowd.
“Father!” Langdon screamed, behind him. “There’s nowhere to go!”
“Look to the heavens! We forget to look to the heavens!”
In that moment, as Langdon saw where the camerlegno was headed, the glorious truth came
flooding all around him. Although Langdon could not see it on account of the lights, he knew their
salvation was directly overhead.
A star-filled Italian sky. The escape route .
The helicopter the camerlegno had summoned to take him to the hospital sat dead ahead, pilot
already in the cockpit, blades already humming in neutral. As the camerlegno ran toward it,
Langdon felt a sudden overwhelming exhilaration.
The thoughts that tore through Langdon’s mind came as a torrent…
First he pictured the wide-open expanse of the Mediterranean Sea. How far was it? Five
miles? Ten? He knew the beach at Fiumocino was only about seven minutes by train. But by
helicopter, 200 miles an hour, no stops… If they could fly the canister far enough out to sea, and
drop it… There were other options too, he realized, feeling almost weightless as he ran. La Cava
Romana! The marble quarries north of the city were less than three miles away. How large were
they? Two square miles? Certainly they were deserted at this hour! Dropping the canister there…
“Everyone back!” the camerlegno yelled. His chest ached as he ran. “Get away! Now!”
The Swiss Guard standing around the chopper stood slack-jawed as the camerlegno
approached them.
“Back!” the priest screamed.
The guards moved back.
With the entire world watching in wonder, the camerlegno ran around the chopper to the
pilot’s door and yanked it open. “Out, son! Now!”
The guard jumped out.
The camerlegno looked at the high cockpit seat and knew that in his exhausted state, he would
need both hands to pull himself up. He turned to the pilot, trembling beside him, and thrust the
canister into his hands. “Hold this. Hand it back when I’m in.”
As the camerlegno pulled himself up, he could hear Robert Langdon yelling excitedly,
running toward the craft. Now you understand , the camerlegno thought. Now you have faith!
The camerlegno pulled himself up into the cockpit, adjusted a few familiar levers, and then
turned back to his window for the canister.
But the guard to whom he had given the canister stood empty-handed. “He took it!” the guard
yelled.
The camerlegno felt his heart seize. “Who!”
The guard pointed. “Him!”
Robert Langdon was surprised by how heavy the canister was. He ran to the other side of the
chopper and jumped in the rear compartment where he and Vittoria had sat only hours ago. He left
the door open and buckled himself in. Then he yelled to the camerlegno in the front seat.
“Fly, Father!”
The camerlegno craned back at Langdon, his face bloodless with dread. “What are you
doing!”
“You fly! I’ll throw!” Langdon barked. “There’s no time! Just fly the blessed chopper!”
The camerlegno seemed momentarily paralyzed, the media lights glaring through the cockpit
darkening the creases in his face. “I can do this alone,” he whispered. “I am supposed to do this
alone.”
Langdon wasn’t listening. Fly! he heard himself screaming. Now! I’m here to help you!
Langdon looked down at the canister and felt his breath catch in his throat when he saw the
numbers. “Three minutes, Father! Three! ”
The number seemed to stun the camerlegno back to sobriety. Without hesitation, he turned
back to the controls. With a grinding roar, the helicopter lifted off.
Through a swirl of dust, Langdon could see Vittoria running toward the chopper. Their eyes
met, and then she dropped away like a sinking stone.
122
Inside the chopper, the whine of the engines and the gale from the open door assaulted
Langdon’s senses with a deafening chaos. He steadied himself against the magnified drag of gravity
as the camerlegno accelerated the craft straight up. The glow of St. Peter’s Square shrank beneath
them until it was an amorphous glowing ellipse radiating in a sea of city lights.
The antimatter canister felt like deadweight in Langdon’s hands. He held tighter, his palms
slick now with sweat and blood. Inside the trap, the globule of antimatter hovered calmly, pulsing
red in the glow of the LED countdown clock.
“Two minutes!” Langdon yelled, wondering where the camerlegno intended to drop the
canister.
The city lights beneath them spread out in all directions. In the distance to the west, Langdon
could see the twinkling delineation of the Mediterranean coast–a jagged border of luminescence
beyond which spread an endless dark expanse of nothingness. The sea looked farther now than
Langdon had imagined. Moreover, the concentration of lights at the coast was a stark reminder that
even far out at sea an explosion might have devastating effects. Langdon had not even considered
the effects of a ten-kiloton tidal wave hitting the coast.
When Langdon turned and looked straight ahead through the cockpit window, he was more
hopeful. Directly in front of them, the rolling shadows of the Roman foothills loomed in the night.
The hills were spotted with lights–the villas of the very wealthy–but a mile or so north, the hills
grew dark. There were no lights at all–just a huge pocket of blackness. Nothing.
The quarries! Langdon thought. La Cava Romana!
Staring intently at the barren pocket of land, Langdon sensed that it was plenty large enough.
It seemed close, too. Much closer than the ocean. Excitement surged through him. This was
obviously where the camerlegno planned to take the antimatter! The chopper was pointing directly
toward it! The quarries! Oddly, however, as the engines strained louder and the chopper hurtled
through the air, Langdon could see that the quarries were not getting any closer. Bewildered, he
shot a glance out the side door to get his bearings. What he saw doused his excitement in a wave of
panic. Directly beneath them, thousands of feet straight down, glowed the media lights in St. Peter’s
Square.
We’re still over the Vatican!
“Camerlegno!” Langdon choked. “Go forward! We’re high enough ! You’ve got to start
moving forward! We can’t drop the canister back over Vatican City!”
The camerlegno did not reply. He appeared to be concentrating on flying the craft.
“We’ve got less than two minutes!” Langdon shouted, holding up the canister. “I can see
them! La Cava Romana! A couple of miles north! We don’t have–”
“No,” the camerlegno said. “It’s far too dangerous. I’m sorry.” As the chopper continued to
claw heavenward, the camerlegno turned and gave Langdon a mournful smile. “I wish you had not
come, my friend. You have made the ultimate sacrifice.”
Langdon looked in the camerlegno’s exhausted eyes and suddenly understood. His blood
turned to ice. “But… there must be somewhere we can go!”
“Up ,” the camerlegno replied, his voice resigned. “It’s the only guarantee.”
Langdon could barely think. He had entirely misinterpreted the camerlegno’s plan. Look to
the heavens!
Heaven , Langdon now realized, was literally where he was headed. The camerlegno had
never intended to drop the antimatter. He was simply getting it as far away from Vatican City as
humanly possible.
This was a one-way trip.
123
In St. Peter’s Square, Vittoria Vetra stared upward. The helicopter was a speck now, the
media lights no longer reaching it. Even the pounding of the rotors had faded to a distant hum. It
seemed, in that instant, that the entire world was focused upward, silenced in anticipation, necks
craned to the heavens… all peoples, all faiths… all hearts beating as one.
Vittoria’s emotions were a cyclone of twisting agonies. As the helicopter disappeared from
sight, she pictured Robert’s face, rising above her. What had he been thinking? Didn’t he
understand?
Around the square, television cameras probed the darkness, waiting. A sea of faces stared
heavenward, united in a silent countdown. The media screens all flickered the same tranquil
scene… a Roman sky illuminated with brilliant stars. Vittoria felt the tears begin to well.
Behind her on the marble escarpment, 161 cardinals stared up in silent awe. Some folded their
hands in prayer. Most stood motionless, transfixed. Some wept. The seconds ticked past.
In homes, bars, businesses, airports, hospitals around the world, souls were joined in universal
witness. Men and women locked hands. Others held their children. Time seemed to hover in limbo,
souls suspended in unison.
Then, cruelly, the bells of St. Peter’s began to toll.
Vittoria let the tears come.
Then… with the whole world watching… time ran out.
The dead silence of the event was the most terrifying of all.
High above Vatican City, a pinpoint of light appeared in the sky. For a fleeting instant, a new
heavenly body had been born… a speck of light as pure and white as anyone had ever seen.
Then it happened.
A flash. The point billowed, as if feeding on itself, unraveling across the sky in a dilating
radius of blinding white. It shot out in all directions, accelerating with incomprehensible speed,
gobbling up the dark. As the sphere of light grew, it intensified, like a burgeoning fiend preparing to
consume the entire sky. It raced downward, toward them, picking up speed.
Blinded, the multitudes of starkly lit human faces gasped as one, shielding their eyes, crying
out in strangled fear.
As the light roared out in all directions, the unimaginable occurred. As if bound by God’s own
will, the surging radius seemed to hit a wall. It was as if the explosion were contained somehow in a
giant glass sphere. The light rebounded inward, sharpening, rippling across itself. The wave
appeared to have reached a predetermined diameter and hovered there. For that instant, a perfect
and silent sphere of light glowed over Rome. Night had become day.
Then it hit.
The concussion was deep and hollow–a thunderous shock wave from above. It descended on
them like the wrath of hell, shaking the granite foundation of Vatican City, knocking the breath out
of people’s lungs, sending others stumbling backward. The reverberation circled the colonnade,
followed by a sudden torrent of warm air. The wind tore through the square, letting out a sepulchral
moan as it whistled through the columns and buffeted the walls. Dust swirled overhead as people
huddled… witnesses to Armageddon.
Then, as fast as it appeared, the sphere imploded, sucking back in on itself, crushing inward to
the tiny point of light from which it had come.
124
Never before had so many been so silent.
The faces in St. Peter’s Square, one by one, averted their eyes from the darkening sky and
turned downward, each person in his or her own private moment of wonder. The media lights
followed suit, dropping their beams back to earth as if out of reverence for the blackness now
settling upon them. It seemed for a moment the entire world was bowing its head in unison.
Cardinal Mortati knelt to pray, and the other cardinals joined him. The Swiss Guard lowered
their long swords and stood numb. No one spoke. No one moved. Everywhere, hearts shuddered
with spontaneous emotion. Bereavement. Fear. Wonder. Belief. And a dread-filled respect for the
new and awesome power they had just witnessed.
Vittoria Vetra stood trembling at the foot of the basilica’s sweeping stairs. She closed her
eyes. Through the tempest of emotions now coursing through her blood, a single word tolled like a
distant bell. Pristine. Cruel. She forced it away. And yet the word echoed. Again she drove it back.
The pain was too great. She tried to lose herself in the images that blazed in other’s minds…
antimatter’s mind-boggling power… the Vatican’s deliverance… the camerlegno… feats of
bravery… miracles… selflessness. And still the word echoed… tolling through the chaos with a
stinging loneliness.
Robert .
He had come for her at Castle St. Angelo.
He had saved her.
And now he had been destroyed by her creation.
As Cardinal Mortati prayed, he wondered if he too would hear God’s voice as the camerlegno
had. Does one need to believe in miracles to experience them? Mortati was a modern man in an
ancient faith. Miracles had never played a part in his belief. Certainly his faith spoke of miracles…
bleeding palms, ascensions from the dead, imprints on shrouds… and yet, Mortati’s rational mind
had always justified these accounts as part of the myth. They were simply the result of man’s
greatest weakness–his need for proof. Miracles were nothing but stories we all clung to because
we wished they were true.
And yet…
Am I so modern that I cannot accept what my eyes have just witnessed? It was a miracle,
was it not? Yes! God, with a few whispered words in the camerlegno’s ear, had intervened and
saved this church. Why was this so hard to believe? What would it say about God if God had done
nothing? That the Almighty did not care? That He was powerless to stop it? A miracle was the only
possible response!
As Mortati knelt in wonder, he prayed for the camerlegno’s soul. He gave thanks to the young
chamberlain who, even in his youthful years, had opened this old man’s eyes to the miracles of
unquestioning faith.
Incredibly, though, Mortati never suspected the extent to which his faith was about to be
tested…
The silence of St. Peter’s Square broke with a ripple at first. The ripple grew to a murmur.
And then, suddenly, to a roar. Without warning, the multitudes were crying out as one.
“Look! Look!”
Mortati opened his eyes and turned to the crowd. Everyone was pointing behind him, toward
the front of St. Peter’s Basilica. Their faces were white. Some fell to their knees. Some fainted.
Some burst into uncontrollable sobs.
“Look! Look!”
Mortati turned, bewildered, following their outstretched hands. They were pointing to the
uppermost level of the basilica, the rooftop terrace, where huge statues of Christ and his apostles
watched over the crowd.
There, on the right of Jesus, arms outstretched to the world… stood Camerlegno Carlo
Ventresca.
125
Robert Langdon was no longer falling.
There was no more terror. No pain. Not even the sound of the racing wind. There was only the
soft sound of lapping water, as though he were comfortably asleep on a beach.
In a paradox of self-awareness, Langdon sensed this was death. He felt glad for it. He allowed
the drifting numbness to possess him entirely. He let it carry him wherever it was he would go. His
pain and fear had been anesthetized, and he did not wish it back at any price. His final memory had
been one that could only have been conjured in hell.
Take me. Please…
But the lapping that lulled in him a far-off sense of peace was also pulling him back. It was
trying to awaken him from a dream. No! Let me be! He did not want to awaken. He sensed demons
gathering on the perimeter of his bliss, pounding to shatter his rapture. Fuzzy images swirled.
Voices yelled. Wind churned. No, please! The more he fought, the more the fury filtered through.
Then, harshly, he was living it all again…
The helicopter was in a dizzying dead climb. He was trapped inside. Beyond the open door,
the lights of Rome looked farther away with every passing second. His survival instinct told him to
jettison the canister right now. Langdon knew it would take less than twenty seconds for the
canister to fall half a mile. But it would be falling toward a city of people.
Higher! Higher!
Langdon wondered how high they were now. Small prop planes, he knew, flew at altitudes of
about four miles. This helicopter had to be at a good fraction of that by now. Two miles up?
Three? There was still a chance. If they timed the drop perfectly, the canister would fall only
partway toward earth, exploding a safe distance over the ground and away from the chopper.
Langdon looked out at the city sprawling below them.
“And if you calculate incorrectly?” the camerlegno said.
Langdon turned, startled. The camerlegno was not even looking at him, apparently having
read Langdon’s thoughts from the ghostly reflection in the windshield. Oddly, the camerlegno was
no longer engrossed in his controls. His hands were not even on the throttle. The chopper, it
seemed, was now in some sort of autopilot mode, locked in a climb. The camerlegno reached above
his head, to the ceiling of the cockpit, fishing behind a cable-housing, where he removed a key,
taped there out of view.
Langdon watched in bewilderment as the camerlegno quickly unlocked the metal cargo box
bolted between the seats. He removed some sort of large, black, nylon pack. He lay it on the seat
next to him. Langdon’s thoughts churned. The camerlegno’s movements seemed composed, as if he
had a solution.
“Give me the canister,” the camerlegno said, his tone serene.
Langdon did not know what to think anymore. He thrust the canister to the camerlegno.
“Ninety seconds!”
What the camerlegno did with the antimatter took Langdon totally by surprise. Holding the
canister carefully in his hands, the camerlegno placed it inside the cargo box. Then he closed the
heavy lid and used the key to lock it tight.
“What are you doing!” Langdon demanded.
“Leading us from temptation.” The camerlegno threw the key out the open window.
As the key tumbled into the night, Langdon felt his soul falling with it.
The camerlegno then took the nylon pack and slipped his arms through the straps. He fastened
a waist clamp around his stomach and cinched it all down like a backpack. He turned to a
dumbstruck Robert Langdon.
“I’m sorry,” the camerlegno said. “It wasn’t supposed to happen this way.” Then he opened
his door and hurled himself into the night.
The image burned in Langdon’s unconscious mind, and with it came the pain. Real pain.
Physical pain. Aching. Searing. He begged to be taken, to let it end, but as the water lapped louder
in his ears, new images began to flash. His hell had only just begun. He saw bits and pieces.
Scattered frames of sheer panic. He lay halfway between death and nightmare, begging for
deliverance, but the pictures grew brighter in his mind.
The antimatter canister was locked out of reach. It counted relentlessly downward as the
chopper shot upward. Fifty seconds . Higher. Higher. Langdon spun wildly in the cabin, trying to
make sense of what he had just seen. Forty-five seconds . He dug under seats searching for another
parachute. Forty seconds . There was none! There had to be an option! Thirty-five seconds . He
raced to the open doorway of the chopper and stood in the raging wind, gazing down at the lights of
Rome below. Thirty-two seconds .
And then he made the choice.
The unbelievable choice…
With no parachute, Robert Langdon had jumped out the door. As the night swallowed his
tumbling body, the helicopter seemed to rocket off above him, the sound of its rotors evaporating in
the deafening rush of his own free fall.
As he plummeted toward earth, Robert Langdon felt something he had not experienced since
his years on the high dive–the inexorable pull of gravity during a dead drop. The faster he fell, the
harder the earth seemed to pull, sucking him down. This time, however, the drop was not fifty feet
into a pool. The drop was thousands of feet into a city–an endless expanse of pavement and
concrete.
Somewhere in the torrent of wind and desperation, Kohler’s voice echoed from the grave…
words he had spoken earlier this morning standing at CERN’s free-fall tube. One square yard of
drag will slow a falling body almost twenty percent . Twenty percent, Langdon now realized, was
not even close to what one would need to survive a fall like this. Nonetheless, more out of paralysis
than hope, he clenched in his hands the sole object he had grabbed from the chopper on his way out
the door. It was an odd memento, but it was one that for a fleeting instant had given him hope.
The windshield tarp had been lying in the back of the helicopter. It was a concave
rectangle–about four yards by two–like a huge fitted sheet… the crudest approximation of a
parachute imaginable. It had no harness, only bungie loops at either end for fastening it to the
curvature of the windshield. Langdon had grabbed it, slid his hands through the loops, held on, and
leapt out into the void.
His last great act of youthful defiance.
No illusions of life beyond this moment.
Langdon fell like a rock. Feet first. Arms raised. His hands gripping the loops. The tarp
billowed like a mushroom overhead. The wind tore past him violently.
As he plummeted toward earth, there was a deep explosion somewhere above him. It seemed
farther off than he had expected. Almost instantly, the shock wave hit. He felt the breath crushed
from his lungs. There was a sudden warmth in the air all around him. He fought to hold on. A wall
of heat raced down from above. The top of the tarp began to smolder… but held.
Langdon rocketed downward, on the edge of a billowing shroud of light, feeling like a surfer
trying to outrun a thousand-foot tidal wave. Then suddenly, the heat receded.
He was falling again through the dark coolness.
For an instant, Langdon felt hope. A moment later, though, that hope faded like the
withdrawing heat above. Despite his straining arms assuring him that the tarp was slowing his fall,
the wind still tore past his body with deafening velocity. Langdon had no doubt he was still moving
too fast to survive the fall. He would be crushed when he hit the ground.
Mathematical figures tumbled through his brain, but he was too numb to make sense of
them… one square yard of drag… 20 percent reduction of speed . All Langdon could figure was
that the tarp over his head was big enough to slow him more than 20 percent. Unfortunately,
though, he could tell from the wind whipping past him that whatever good the tarp was doing was
not enough. He was still falling fast… there would be no surviving the impact on the waiting sea of
concrete.
Beneath him, the lights of Rome spread out in all directions. The city looked like an enormous
starlit sky that Langdon was falling into. The perfect expanse of stars was marred only by a dark
strip that split the city in two–a wide, unlit ribbon that wound through the dots of light like a fat
snake. Langdon stared down at the meandering swatch of black.
Suddenly, like the surging crest of an unexpected wave, hope filled him again.
With almost maniacal vigor, Langdon yanked down hard with his right hand on the canopy.
The tarp suddenly flapped louder, billowing, cutting right to find the path of least resistance.
Langdon felt himself drifting sideways. He pulled again, harder, ignoring the pain in his palm. The
tarp flared, and Langdon sensed his body sliding laterally. Not much. But some! He looked
beneath him again, to the sinuous serpent of black. It was off to the right, but he was still pretty
high. Had he waited too long? He pulled with all his might and accepted somehow that it was now
in the hands of God. He focused hard on the widest part of the serpent and… for the first time in his
life, prayed for a miracle.
The rest was a blur.
The darkness rushing up beneath him… the diving instincts coming back… the reflexive
locking of his spine and pointing of the toes… the inflating of his lungs to protect his vital organs…
the flexing of his legs into a battering ram… and finally… the thankfulness that the winding Tiber
River was raging… making its waters frothy and air-filled… and three times softer than standing
water.
Then there was impact… and blackness.
It had been the thundering sound of the flapping canopy that drew the group’s eyes away from
the fireball in the sky. The sky above Rome had been filled with sights tonight… a skyrocketing
helicopter, an enormous explosion, and now this strange object that had plummeted into the
churning waters of the Tiber River, directly off the shore of the river’s tiny island, Isola Tiberina.
Ever since the island had been used to quarantine the sick during the Roman plague of A.D.
1656, it had been thought to have mystic healing properties. For this reason, the island had later
become the site for Rome’s Hospital Tiberina.
The body was battered when they pulled it onto shore. The man still had a faint pulse, which
was amazing, they thought. They wondered if it was Isola Tiberina’s mythical reputation for healing
that had somehow kept his heart pumping. Minutes later, when the man began coughing and slowly
regained consciousness, the group decided the island must indeed be magical.
126
Cardinal Mortati knew there were no words in any language that could have added to the
mystery of this moment. The silence of the vision over St. Peter’s Square sang louder than any
chorus of angels.
As he stared up at Camerlegno Ventresca, Mortati felt the paralyzing collision of his heart and
mind. The vision seemed real, tangible. And yet… how could it be? Everyone had seen the
camerlegno get in the helicopter. They had all witnessed the ball of light in the sky. And now,
somehow, the camerlegno stood high above them on the rooftop terrace. Transported by angels?
Reincarnated by the hand of God?
This is impossible…
Mortati’s heart wanted nothing more than to believe, but his mind cried out for reason. And
yet all around him, the cardinals stared up, obviously seeing what he was seeing, paralyzed with
wonder.
It was the camerlegno. There was no doubt. But he looked different somehow. Divine. As if
he had been purified. A spirit? A man? His white flesh shone in the spotlights with an incorporeal
weightlessness.
In the square there was crying, cheering, spontaneous applause. A group of nuns fell to their
knees and wailed saetas . A pulsing grew from in the crowd. Suddenly, the entire square was
chanting the camerlegno’s name. The cardinals, some with tears rolling down their faces, joined in.
Mortati looked around him and tried to comprehend. Is this really happening?
Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca stood on the rooftop terrace of St. Peter’s Basilica and looked
down over the multitudes of people staring up at him. Was he awake or dreaming? He felt
transformed, otherworldly. He wondered if it was his body or just his spirit that had floated down
from heaven toward the soft, darkened expanse of the Vatican City Gardens… alighting like a silent
angel on the deserted lawns, his black parachute shrouded from the madness by the towering
shadow of St. Peter’s Basilica. He wondered if it was his body or his spirit that had possessed the
strength to climb the ancient Stairway of Medallions to the rooftop terrace where he now stood.
He felt as light as a ghost.
Although the people below were chanting his name, he knew it was not him they were
cheering. They were cheering from impulsive joy, the same kind of joy he felt every day of his life
as he pondered the Almighty. They were experiencing what each of them had always longed for…
an assurance of the beyond… a substantiation of the power of the Creator.
Camerlegno Ventresca had prayed all his life for this moment, and still, even he could not
fathom that God had found a way to make it manifest. He wanted to cry out to them. Your God is a
living God! Behold the miracles all around you!
He stood there a while, numb and yet feeling more than he had ever felt. When, at last, the
spirit moved him, he bowed his head and stepped back from the edge.
Alone now, he knelt on the roof, and prayed.
127
The images around him blurred, drifting in and out. Langdon’s eyes slowly began to focus.
His legs ached, and his body felt like it had been run over by a truck. He was lying on his side on
the ground. Something stunk, like bile. He could still hear the incessant sound of lapping water. It
no longer sounded peaceful to him. There were other sounds too–talking close around him. He saw
blurry white forms. Were they all wearing white? Langdon decided he was either in an asylum or
heaven. From the burning in his throat, Langdon decided it could not be heaven.
“He’s finished vomiting ,” one man said in Italian. “Turn him .” The voice was firm and
professional.
Langdon felt hands slowly rolling him onto his back. His head swam. He tried to sit up, but
the hands gently forced him back down. His body submitted. Then Langdon felt someone going
through his pockets, removing items.
Then he passed out cold.
Dr. Jacobus was not a religious man; the science of medicine had bred that from him long
ago. And yet, the events in Vatican City tonight had put his systematic logic to the test. Now bodies
are falling from the sky?
Dr. Jacobus felt the pulse of the bedraggled man they had just pulled from the Tiber River.
The doctor decided that God himself had hand-delivered this one to safety. The concussion of
hitting the water had knocked the victim unconscious, and if it had not been for Jacobus and his
crew standing out on the shore watching the spectacle in the sky, this falling soul would surely have
gone unnoticed and drowned.
“É Americano ,” a nurse said, going through the man’s wallet after they pulled him to dry
land.
American? Romans often joked that Americans had gotten so abundant in Rome that
hamburgers should become the official Italian food. But Americans falling from the sky? Jacobus
flicked a penlight in the man’s eyes, testing his dilation. “Sir? Can you hear me? Do you know
where you are?”
The man was unconscious again. Jacobus was not surprised. The man had vomited a lot of
water after Jacobus had performed CPR.
“Si chiama Robert Langdon ,” the nurse said, reading the man’s driver’s license.
The group assembled on the dock all stopped short.
“Impossibile!” Jacobus declared. Robert Langdon was the man from the television–the
American professor who had been helping the Vatican. Jacobus had seen Mr. Langdon, only
minutes ago, getting into a helicopter in St. Peter’s Square and flying miles up into the air. Jacobus
and the others had run out to the dock to witness the antimatter explosion–a tremendous sphere of
light like nothing any of them had ever seen. How could this be the same man!
“It’s him!” the nurse exclaimed, brushing his soaked hair back. “And I recognize his tweed
coat!”
Suddenly someone was yelling from the hospital entryway. It was one of the patients. She was
screaming, going mad, holding her portable radio to the sky and praising God. Apparently
Camerlegno Ventresca had just miraculously appeared on the roof of the Vatican.
Dr. Jacobus decided, when his shift got off at 8 A.M., he was going straight to church.
The lights over Langdon’s head were brighter now, sterile. He was on some kind of
examination table. He smelled astringents, strange chemicals. Someone had just given him an
injection, and they had removed his clothes.
Definitely not gypsies , he decided in his semiconscious delirium. Aliens, perhaps? Yes, he
had heard about things like this. Fortunately these beings would not harm him. All they wanted
were his–
“Not on your life!” Langdon sat bolt upright, eyes flying open.
“Attento!” one of the creatures yelled, steadying him. His badge read Dr. Jacobus. He looked
remarkably human.
Langdon stammered, “I… thought…”
“Easy, Mr. Langdon. You’re in a hospital.”
The fog began to lift. Langdon felt a wave of relief. He hated hospitals, but they certainly beat
aliens harvesting his testicles.
“My name is Dr. Jacobus,” the man said. He explained what had just happened. “You are very
lucky to be alive.”
Langdon did not feel lucky. He could barely make sense of his own memories… the
helicopter… the camerlegno. His body ached everywhere. They gave him some water, and he
rinsed out his mouth. They placed a new gauze on his palm.
“Where are my clothes?” Langdon asked. He was wearing a paper robe.
One of the nurses motioned to a dripping wad of shredded khaki and tweed on the counter.
“They were soaked. We had to cut them off you.”
Langdon looked at his shredded Harris tweed and frowned.
“You had some Kleenex in your pocket,” the nurse said.
It was then that Langdon saw the ravaged shreds of parchment clinging all over the lining of
his jacket. The folio from Galileo’s Diagramma . The last copy on earth had just dissolved. He was
too numb to know how to react. He just stared.
“We saved your personal items.” She held up a plastic bin. “Wallet, camcorder, and pen. I
dried the camcorder off the best I could.”
“I don’t own a camcorder.”
The nurse frowned and held out the bin. Langdon looked at the contents. Along with his
wallet and pen was a tiny Sony RUVI camcorder. He recalled it now. Kohler had handed it to him
and asked him to give it to the media.
“We found it in your pocket. I think you’ll need a new one, though.” The nurse flipped open
the two-inch screen on the back. “Your viewer is cracked.” Then she brightened. “The sound still
works, though. Barely.” She held the device up to her ear. “Keeps playing something over and
over.” She listened a moment and then scowled, handing it to Langdon. “Two guys arguing, I
think.”
Puzzled, Langdon took the camcorder and held it to his ear. The voices were pinched and
metallic, but they were discernible. One close. One far away. Langdon recognized them both.
Sitting there in his paper gown, Langdon listened in amazement to the conversation. Although
he couldn’t see what was happening, when he heard the shocking finale, he was thankful he had
been spared the visual.
My God!
As the conversation began playing again from the beginning, Langdon lowered the camcorder
from his ear and sat in appalled mystification. The antimatter… the helicopter… Langdon’s mind
now kicked into gear.
But that means…
He wanted to vomit again. With a rising fury of disorientation and rage, Langdon got off the
table and stood on shaky legs.
“Mr. Langdon!” the doctor said, trying to stop him.
“I need some clothes,” Langdon demanded, feeling the draft on his rear from the backless
gown.
“But, you need to rest.”
“I’m checking out. Now. I need some clothes.”
“But, sir, you–”
“Now!”
Everyone exchanged bewildered looks. “We have no clothes,” the doctor said. “Perhaps
tomorrow a friend could bring you some.”
Langdon drew a slow patient breath and locked eyes with the doctor. “Dr. Jacobus, I am
walking out your door right now. I need clothes. I am going to Vatican City. One does not go to
Vatican City with one’s ass hanging out. Do I make myself clear?”
Dr. Jacobus swallowed hard. “Get this man something to wear.”
When Langdon limped out of Hospital Tiberina, he felt like an overgrown Cub Scout. He was
wearing a blue paramedic’s jumpsuit that zipped up the front and was adorned with cloth badges
that apparently depicted his numerous qualifications.
The woman accompanying him was heavyset and wore a similar suit. The doctor had assured
Langdon she would get him to the Vatican in record time.
“Molto traffico ,” Langdon said, reminding her that the area around the Vatican was packed
with cars and people.
The woman looked unconcerned. She pointed proudly to one of her patches. “Sono
conducente di ambulanza .”
“Ambulanza?” That explained it. Langdon felt like he could use an ambulance ride.
The woman led him around the side of the building. On an outcropping over the water was a
cement deck where her vehicle sat waiting. When Langdon saw the vehicle he stopped in his tracks.
It was an aging medevac chopper. The hull read Aero-Ambulanza .
He hung his head.
The woman smiled. “Fly Vatican City. Very fast.”
128
The College of Cardinals bristled with ebullience and electricity as they streamed back into
the Sistine Chapel. In contrast, Mortati felt in himself a rising confusion he thought might lift him
off the floor and carry him away. He believed in the ancient miracles of the Scriptures, and yet what
he had just witnessed in person was something he could not possibly comprehend. After a lifetime
of devotion, seventy-nine years, Mortati knew these events should ignite in him a pious
exuberance… a fervent and living faith. And yet all he felt was a growing spectral unease.
Something did not feel right.
“Signore Mortati!” a Swiss Guard yelled, running down the hall. “We have gone to the roof as
you asked. The camerlegno is… flesh ! He is a true man! He is not a spirit! He is exactly as we
knew him!”
“Did he speak to you?”
“He kneels in silent prayer! We are afraid to touch him!”
Mortati was at a loss. “Tell him… his cardinals await.”
“Signore, because he is a man …” the guard hesitated.
“What is it?”
“His chest… he is burned. Should we bind his wounds? He must be in pain.”
Mortati considered it. Nothing in his lifetime of service to the church had prepared him for
this situation. “He is a man, so serve him as a man. Bathe him. Bind his wounds. Dress him in fresh
robes. We await his arrival in the Sistine Chapel.”
The guard ran off.
Mortati headed for the chapel. The rest of the cardinals were inside now. As he walked down
the hall, he saw Vittoria Vetra slumped alone on a bench at the foot of the Royal Staircase. He
could see the pain and loneliness of her loss and wanted to go to her, but he knew it would have to
wait. He had work to do… although he had no idea what that work could possibly be.
Mortati entered the chapel. There was a riotous excitement. He closed the door. God help me .
Hospital Tiberina’s twin-rotor Aero-Ambulanza circled in behind Vatican City, and Langdon
clenched his teeth, swearing to God this was the very last helicopter ride of his life.
After convincing the pilot that the rules governing Vatican airspace were the least of the
Vatican’s concerns right now, he guided her in, unseen, over the rear wall, and landed them on the
Vatican’s helipad.
“Grazie ,” he said, lowering himself painfully onto the ground. She blew him a kiss and
quickly took off, disappearing back over the wall and into the night.
Langdon exhaled, trying to clear his head, hoping to make sense of what he was about to do.
With the camcorder in hand, he boarded the same golf cart he had ridden earlier that day. It had not
been charged, and the battery-meter registered close to empty. Langdon drove without headlights to
conserve power.
He also preferred no one see him coming.
At the back of the Sistine Chapel, Cardinal Mortati stood in a daze as he watched the
pandemonium before him.
“It was a miracle!” one of the cardinals shouted. “The work of God!”
“Yes!” others exclaimed. “God has made His will manifest!”
“The camerlegno will be our Pope!” another shouted. “He is not a cardinal, but God has sent a
miraculous sign!”
“Yes!” someone agreed. “The laws of conclave are man’s laws. God’s will is before us! I
call for a balloting immediately!”
“A balloting?” Mortati demanded, moving toward them. “I believe that is my job.”
Everyone turned.
Mortati could sense the cardinals studying him. They seemed distant, at a loss, offended by
his sobriety. Mortati longed to feel his heart swept up in the miraculous exultation he saw in the
faces around him. But he was not. He felt an inexplicable pain in his soul… an aching sadness he
could not explain. He had vowed to guide these proceedings with purity of soul, and this hesitancy
was something he could not deny.
“My friends,” Mortati said, stepping to the altar. His voice did not seem his own. “I suspect I
will struggle for the rest of my days with the meaning of what I have witnessed tonight. And yet,
what you are suggesting regarding the camerlegno… it cannot possibly be God’s will.”
The room fell silent.
“How… can you say that?” one of the cardinals finally demanded. “The camerlegno saved
the church. God spoke to the camerlegno directly! The man survived death itself! What sign do we
need!”
“The camerlegno is coming to us now,” Mortati said. “Let us wait. Let us hear him before we
have a balloting. There may be an explanation.”
“An explanation?”
“As your Great Elector, I have vowed to uphold the laws of conclave. You are no doubt aware
that by Holy Law the camerlegno is ineligible for election to the papacy. He is not a cardinal. He is
a priest… a chamberlain. There is also the question of his inadequate age.” Mortati felt the stares
hardening. “By even allowing a balloting, I would be requesting that you endorse a man who
Vatican Law proclaims ineligible. I would be asking each of you to break a sacred oath.”
“But what happened here tonight,” someone stammered, “it certainly transcends our laws!”
“Does it?” Mortati boomed, not even knowing now where his words were coming from. “Is it
God’s will that we discard the rules of the church? Is it God’s will that we abandon reason and give
ourselves over to frenzy?”
“But did you not see what we saw?” another challenged angrily. “How can you presume to
question that kind of power!”
Mortati’s voice bellowed now with a resonance he had never known. “I am not questioning
God’s power! It is God who gave us reason and circumspection! It is God we serve by exercising
prudence!”
129
In the hallway outside the Sistine Chapel, Vittoria Vetra sat benumbed on a bench at the foot
of the Royal Staircase. When she saw the figure coming through the rear door, she wondered if she
were seeing another spirit. He was bandaged, limping, and wearing some kind of medical suit.
She stood… unable to believe the vision. “Ro… bert?”
He never answered. He strode directly to her and wrapped her in his arms. When he pressed
his lips to hers, it was an impulsive, longing kiss filled with thankfulness.
Vittoria felt the tears coming. “Oh, God… oh, thank God…”
He kissed her again, more passionately, and she pressed against him, losing herself in his
embrace. Their bodies locked, as if they had known each other for years. She forgot the fear and
pain. She closed her eyes, weightless in the moment.
“It is God’s will!” someone was yelling, his voice echoing in the Sistine Chapel. “Who but
the chosen one could have survived that diabolical explosion?”
“Me,” a voice reverberated from the back of the chapel.
Mortati and the others turned in wonder at the bedraggled form coming up the center aisle.
“Mr…. Langdon? ”
Without a word, Langdon walked slowly to the front of the chapel. Vittoria Vetra entered too.
Then two guards hurried in, pushing a cart with a large television on it. Langdon waited while they
plugged it in, facing the cardinals. Then Langdon motioned for the guards to leave. They did,
closing the door behind them.
Now it was only Langdon, Vittoria, and the cardinals. Langdon plugged the Sony RUVI’s
output into the television. Then he pressed Play .
The television blared to life.
The scene that materialized before the cardinals revealed the Pope’s office. The video had
been awkwardly filmed, as if by hidden camera. Off center on the screen the camerlegno stood in
the dimness, in front of a fire. Although he appeared to be talking directly to the camera, it quickly
became evident that he was speaking to someone else–whoever was making this video. Langdon
told them the video was filmed by Maximilian Kohler, the director of CERN. Only an hour ago
Kohler had secretly recorded his meeting with the camerlegno by using a tiny camcorder covertly
mounted under the arm of his wheelchair.
Mortati and the cardinals watched in bewilderment. Although the conversation was already in
progress, Langdon did not bother to rewind. Apparently, whatever Langdon wanted the cardinals to
see was coming up…
“Leonardo Vetra kept diaries?” the camerlegno was saying. “I suppose that is good news for
CERN. If the diaries contain his processes for creating antimatter–”
“They don’t,” Kohler said. “You will be relieved to know those processes died with
Leonardo. However, his diaries spoke of something else. You .”
The camerlegno looked troubled. “I don’t understand.”
“They described a meeting Leonardo had last month. With you .”
The camerlegno hesitated, then looked toward the door. “Rocher should not have granted you
access without consulting me. How did you get in here?”
“Rocher knows the truth. I called earlier and told him what you have done.”
“What I have done? Whatever story you told him, Rocher is a Swiss Guard and far too
faithful to this church to believe a bitter scientist over his camerlegno.”
“Actually, he is too faithful not to believe. He is so faithful that despite the evidence that one
of his loyal guards had betrayed the church, he refused to accept it. All day long he has been
searching for another explanation.”
“So you gave him one.”
“The truth. Shocking as it was.”
“If Rocher believed you, he would have arrested me.”
“No. I wouldn’t let him. I offered him my silence in exchange for this meeting.”
The camerlegno let out an odd laugh. “You plan to blackmail the church with a story that no
one will possibly believe?”
“I have no need of blackmail. I simply want to hear the truth from your lips. Leonardo Vetra
was a friend.”
The camerlegno said nothing. He simply stared down at Kohler.
“Try this,” Kohler snapped. “About a month ago, Leonardo Vetra contacted you requesting an
urgent audience with the Pope–an audience you granted because the Pope was an admirer of
Leonardo’s work and because Leonardo said it was an emergency.”
The camerlegno turned to the fire. He said nothing.
“Leonardo came to the Vatican in great secrecy. He was betraying his daughter’s confidence
by coming here, a fact that troubled him deeply, but he felt he had no choice. His research had left
him deeply conflicted and in need of spiritual guidance from the church. In a private meeting, he
told you and the Pope that he had made a scientific discovery with profound religious implications.
He had proved Genesis was physically possible, and that intense sources of energy–what Vetra
called God –could duplicate the moment of Creation.”
Silence.
“The Pope was stunned,” Kohler continued. “He wanted Leonardo to go public. His Holiness
thought this discovery might begin to bridge the gap between science and religion–one of the
Pope’s life dreams. Then Leonardo explained to you the downside–the reason he required the
church’s guidance. It seemed his Creation experiment, exactly as your Bible predicts, produced
everything in pairs. Opposites. Light and dark. Vetra found himself, in addition to creating matter,
creating antimatter . Shall I go on?”
The camerlegno was silent. He bent down and stoked the coals.
“After Leonardo Vetra came here,” Kohler said, “you came to CERN to see his work.
Leonardo’s diaries said you made a personal trip to his lab.”
The camerlegno looked up.
Kohler went on. “The Pope could not travel without attracting media attention, so he sent you
. Leonardo gave you a secret tour of his lab. He showed you an antimatter annihilation–the Big
Bang–the power of Creation. He also showed you a large specimen he kept locked away as proof
that his new process could produce antimatter on a large scale. You were in awe. You returned to
Vatican City to report to the Pope what you had witnessed.”
The camerlegno sighed. “And what is it that troubles you? That I would respect Leonardo’s
confidentiality by pretending before the world tonight that I knew nothing of antimatter?”
“No! It troubles me that Leonardo Vetra practically proved the existence of your God, and
you had him murdered!”
The camerlegno turned now, his face revealing nothing.
The only sound was the crackle of the fire.
Suddenly, the camera jiggled, and Kohler’s arm appeared in the frame. He leaned forward,
seeming to struggle with something affixed beneath his wheelchair. When he sat back down, he
held a pistol out before him. The camera angle was a chilling one… looking from behind… down
the length of the outstretched gun… directly at the camerlegno.
Kohler said, “Confess your sins, Father. Now.”
The camerlegno looked startled. “You will never get out of here alive.”
“Death would be a welcome relief from the misery your faith has put me through since I was
a boy.” Kohler held the gun with both hands now. “I am giving you a choice. Confess your sins…
or die right now.”
The camerlegno glanced toward the door.
“Rocher is outside,” Kohler challenged. “He too is prepared to kill you.”
“Rocher is a sworn protector of th–”
“Rocher let me in here. Armed . He is sickened by your lies. You have a single option.
Confess to me. I have to hear it from your very lips.”
The camerlegno hesitated.
Kohler cocked his gun. “Do you really doubt I will kill you?”
“No matter what I tell you,” the camerlegno said, “a man like you will never understand.”
“Try me.”
The camerlegno stood still for a moment, a dominant silhouette in the dim light of the fire.
When he spoke, his words echoed with a dignity more suited to the glorious recounting of altruism
than that of a confession.
“Since the beginning of time,” the camerlegno said, “this church has fought the enemies of
God. Sometimes with words. Sometimes with swords. And we have always survived.”
The camerlegno radiated conviction.
“But the demons of the past,” he continued, “were demons of fire and abomination… they
were enemies we could fight–enemies who inspired fear . Yet Satan is shrewd. As time passed, he
cast off his diabolical countenance for a new face… the face of pure reason. Transparent and
insidious, but soulless all the same.” The camerlegno’s voice flashed sudden anger–an almost
maniacal transition. “Tell me, Mr. Kohler! How can the church condemn that which makes logical
sense to our minds! How can we decry that which is now the very foundation of our society! Each
time the church raises its voice in warning, you shout back, calling us ignorant. Paranoid.
Controlling! And so your evil grows. Shrouded in a veil of self-righteous intellectualism. It spreads
like a cancer. Sanctified by the miracles of its own technology. Deifying itself! Until we no longer
suspect you are anything but pure goodness. Science has come to save us from our sickness, hunger,
and pain! Behold science–the new God of endless miracles, omnipotent and benevolent! Ignore the
weapons and the chaos. Forget the fractured loneliness and endless peril. Science is here!” The
camerlegno stepped toward the gun. “But I have seen Satan’s face lurking… I have seen the
peril…”
“What are you talking about! Vetra’s science practically proved the existence of your God!
He was your ally!”
“Ally? Science and religion are not in this together! We do not seek the same God, you and I!
Who is your God? One of protons, masses, and particle charges? How does your God inspire ? How
does your God reach into the hearts of man and remind him he is accountable to a greater power!
Remind him that he is accountable to his fellow man! Vetra was misguided. His work was not
religious, it was sacrilegious ! Man cannot put God’s Creation in a test tube and wave it around for
the world to see! This does not glorify God, it demeans God!” The camerlegno was clawing at his
body now, his voice manic.
“And so you had Leonardo Vetra killed!”
“For the church! For all mankind! The madness of it! Man is not ready to hold the power of
Creation in his hands. God in a test tube? A droplet of liquid that can vaporize an entire city? He
had to be stopped!” The camerlegno fell abruptly silent. He looked away, back toward the fire. He
seemed to be contemplating his options.
Kohler’s hands leveled the gun. “You have confessed. You have no escape.”
The camerlegno laughed sadly. “Don’t you see. Confessing your sins is the escape.” He
looked toward the door. “When God is on your side, you have options a man like you could never
comprehend.” With his words still hanging in the air, the camerlegno grabbed the neck of his
cassock and violently tore it open, revealing his bare chest.
Kohler jolted, obviously startled. “What are you doing!”
The camerlegno did not reply. He stepped backward, toward the fireplace, and removed an
object from the glowing embers.
“Stop!” Kohler demanded, his gun still leveled. “What are you doing!”
When the camerlegno turned, he was holding a red-hot brand. The Illuminati Diamond. The
man’s eyes looked wild suddenly. “I had intended to do this all alone.” His voice seethed with a
feral intensity. “But now… I see God meant for you to be here. You are my salvation.”
Before Kohler could react, the camerlegno closed his eyes, arched his back, and rammed the
red hot brand into the center of his own chest. His flesh hissed. “Mother Mary! Blessed Mother…
Behold your son!” He screamed out in agony.
Kohler lurched into the frame now… standing awkwardly on his feet, gun wavering wildly
before him.
The camerlegno screamed louder, teetering in shock. He threw the brand at Kohler’s feet.
Then the priest collapsed on the floor, writhing in agony.
What happened next was a blur.
There was a great flurry onscreen as the Swiss Guard burst into the room. The soundtrack
exploded with gunfire. Kohler clutched his chest, blown backward, bleeding, falling into his
wheelchair.
“No!” Rocher called, trying to stop his guards from firing on Kohler.
The camerlegno, still writhing on the floor, rolled and pointed frantically at Rocher.
“Illuminatus! ”
“You bastard,” Rocher yelled, running at him. “You sanctimonious bas–”
Chartrand cut him down with three bullets. Rocher slid dead across the floor.
Then the guards ran to the wounded camerlegno, gathering around him. As they huddled, the
video caught the face of a dazed Robert Langdon, kneeling beside the wheelchair, looking at the
brand. Then, the entire frame began lurching wildly. Kohler had regained consciousness and was
detaching the tiny camcorder from its holder under the arm of the wheelchair. Then he tried to hand
the camcorder to Langdon.
“G-give…” Kohler gasped. “G-give this to the m-media.”
Then the screen went blank.
130
The camerlegno began to feel the fog of wonder and adrenaline dissipating. As the Swiss
Guard helped him down the Royal Staircase toward the Sistine Chapel, the camerlegno heard
singing in St. Peter’s Square and he knew that mountains had been moved.
Grazie Dio .
He had prayed for strength, and God had given it to him. At moments when he had doubted,
God had spoken. Yours is a Holy mission , God had said. I will give you strength . Even with God’s
strength, the camerlegno had felt fear, questioning the righteousness of his path.
If not you , God had challenged, then Who ?
If not now, then When ?
If not this way, then How ?
Jesus, God reminded him, had saved them all… saved them from their own apathy. With two
deeds, Jesus had opened their eyes. Horror and Hope. The crucifixion and the resurrection. He had
changed the world.
But that was millennia ago. Time had eroded the miracle. People had forgotten. They had
turned to false idols–techno-deities and miracles of the mind. What about miracles of the heart!
The camerlegno had often prayed to God to show him how to make the people believe again.
But God had been silent. It was not until the camerlegno’s moment of deepest darkness that God
had come to him. Oh, the horror of that night!
The camerlegno could still remember lying on the floor in tattered nightclothes, clawing at his
own flesh, trying to purge his soul of the pain brought on by a vile truth he had just learned. It
cannot be! he had screamed. And yet he knew it was. The deception tore at him like the fires of
hell. The bishop who had taken him in, the man who had been like a father to him, the clergyman
whom the camerlegno had stood beside while he rose to the papacy… was a fraud. A common
sinner. Lying to the world about a deed so traitorous at its core that the camerlegno doubted even
God could forgive it. “Your vow !” the camerlegno had screamed at the Pope. “You broke your vow
to God! You , of all men!”
The Pope had tried to explain himself, but the camerlegno could not listen. He had run out,
staggering blindly through the hallways, vomiting, tearing at his own skin, until he found himself
bloody and alone, lying on the cold earthen floor before St. Peter’s tomb. Mother Mary, what do I
do? It was in that moment of pain and betrayal, as the camerlegno lay devastated in the
Necropolis, praying for God to take him from this faithless world, that God had come.
The voice in his head resounded like peals of thunder. “Did you vow to serve your God? ”
“Yes!” the camerlegno cried out.
“Would you die for your God? ”
“Yes! Take me now!”
“Would you die for your church? ”
“Yes! Please deliver me!”
“But would you die for… mankind? ”
It was in the silence that followed that the camerlegno felt himself falling into the abyss. He
tumbled farther, faster, out of control. And yet he knew the answer. He had always known.
“Yes!” he shouted into the madness. “I would die for man! Like your son, I would die for
them!”
Hours later, the camerlegno still lay shivering on his floor. He saw his mother’s face. God has
plans for you , she was saying. The camerlegno plunged deeper into madness. It was then God had
spoken again. This time with silence. But the camerlegno understood. Restore their faith .
If not me… then who?
If not now… then when?
As the guards unbolted the door of the Sistine Chapel, Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca felt the
power moving in his veins… exactly as it had when he was a boy. God had chosen him. Long ago.
His will be done .
The camerlegno felt reborn. The Swiss Guard had bandaged his chest, bathed him, and
dressed him in a fresh white linen robe. They had also given him an injection of morphine for the
burn. The camerlegno wished they had not given him painkillers. Jesus endured his pain for three
days on the cross! He could already feel the drug uprooting his senses… a dizzying undertow.
As he walked into the chapel, he was not at all surprised to see the cardinals staring at him in
wonder. They are in awe of God , he reminded himself. Not of me, but how God works THROUGH
me . As he moved up the center aisle, he saw bewilderment in every face. And yet, with each new
face he passed, he sensed something else in their eyes. What was it? The camerlegno had tried to
imagine how they would receive him tonight. Joyfully? Reverently? He tried to read their eyes and
saw neither emotion.
It was then the camerlegno looked at the altar and saw Robert Langdon.
131
Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca stood in the aisle of the Sistine Chapel. The cardinals were all
standing near the front of the church, turned, staring at him. Robert Langdon was on the altar beside
a television that was on endless loop, playing a scene the camerlegno recognized but could not
imagine how it had come to be. Vittoria Vetra stood beside him, her face drawn.
The camerlegno closed his eyes for a moment, hoping the morphine was making him
hallucinate and that when he opened them the scene might be different. But it was not.
They knew.
Oddly, he felt no fear. Show me the way, Father. Give me the words that I can make them see
Your vision .
But the camerlegno heard no reply.
Father, We have come too far together to fail now .
Silence.
They do not understand what We have done .
The camerlegno did not know whose voice he heard in his own mind, but the message was
stark.
And the truth shall set you free…
And so it was that Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca held his head high as he walked toward the
front of the Sistine Chapel. As he moved toward the cardinals, not even the diffused light of the
candles could soften the eyes boring into him. Explain yourself , the faces said. Make sense of this
madness. Tell us our fears are wrong!
Truth , the camerlegno told himself. Only truth . There were too many secrets in these walls…
one so dark it had driven him to madness. But from the madness had come the light .
“If you could give your own soul to save millions,” the camerlegno said, as he moved down
the aisle, “would you?”
The faces in the chapel simply stared. No one moved. No one spoke. Beyond the walls, the
joyous strains of song could be heard in the square.
The camerlegno walked toward them. “Which is the greater sin? Killing one’s enemy? Or
standing idle while your true love is strangled?” They are singing in St. Peter’s Square! The
camerlegno stopped for a moment and gazed up at the ceiling of the Sistine. Michelangelo’s God
was staring down from the darkened vault… and He seemed pleased.
“I could no longer stand by,” the camerlegno said. Still, as he drew nearer, he saw no flicker
of understanding in anyone’s eyes. Didn’t they see the radiant simplicity of his deeds? Didn’t they
see the utter necessity!
It had been so pure.
The Illuminati. Science and Satan as one.
Resurrect the ancient fear. Then crush it.
Horror and Hope. Make them believe again .
Tonight, the power of the Illuminati had been unleashed anew… and with glorious
consequence. The apathy had evaporated. The fear had shot out across the world like a bolt of
lightning, uniting the people. And then God’s majesty had vanquished the darkness.
I could not stand idly by!
The inspiration had been God’s own–appearing like a beacon in the camerlegno’s night of
agony. Oh, this faithless world! Someone must deliver them. You. If not you, who? You have been
saved for a reason. Show them the old demons. Remind them of their fear. Apathy is death. Without
darkness, there is no light. Without evil, there is no good. Make them choose. Dark or light. Where
is the fear? Where are the heroes? If not now, when?
The camerlegno walked up the center aisle directly toward the crowd of standing cardinals.
He felt like Moses as the sea of red sashes and caps parted before him, allowing him to pass. On the
altar, Robert Langdon switched off the television, took Vittoria’s hand, and relinquished the altar.
The fact that Robert Langdon had survived, the camerlegno knew, could only have been God’s will.
God had saved Robert Langdon. The camerlegno wondered why.
The voice that broke the silence was the voice of the only woman in the Sistine Chapel. “You
killed my father?” she said, stepping forward.
When the camerlegno turned to Vittoria Vetra, the look on her face was one he could not
quite understand–pain yes, but anger ? Certainly she must understand. Her father’s genius was
deadly. He had to be stopped. For the good of Mankind.
“He was doing God’s work,” Vittoria said.
“God’s work is not done in a lab. It is done in the heart.”
“My father’s heart was pure! And his research proved–”
“His research proved yet again that man’s mind is progressing faster than his soul!” The
camerlegno’s voice was sharper than he had expected. He lowered his voice. “If a man as spiritual
as your father could create a weapon like the one we saw tonight, imagine what an ordinary man
will do with his technology.”
“A man like you ?”
The camerlegno took a deep breath. Did she not see? Man’s morality was not advancing as
fast as man’s science. Mankind was not spiritually evolved enough for the powers he possessed. We
have never created a weapon we have not used! And yet he knew that antimatter was
nothing–another weapon in man’s already burgeoning arsenal. Man could already destroy. Man
learned to kill long ago. And his mother’s blood rained down . Leonardo Vetra’s genius was
dangerous for another reason.
“For centuries,” the camerlegno said, “the church has stood by while science picked away at
religion bit by bit. Debunking miracles. Training the mind to overcome the heart. Condemning
religion as the opiate of the masses. They denounce God as a hallucination–a delusional crutch for
those too weak to accept that life is meaningless. I could not stand by while science presumed to
harness the power of God himself! Proof , you say? Yes, proof of science’s ignorance! What is
wrong with the admission that something exists beyond our understanding? The day science
substantiates God in a lab is the day people stop needing faith!”
“You mean the day they stop needing the church ,” Vittoria challenged, moving toward him.
“Doubt is your last shred of control. It is doubt that brings souls to you. Our need to know that life
has meaning. Man’s insecurity and need for an enlightened soul assuring him everything is part of a
master plan. But the church is not the only enlightened soul on the planet! We all seek God in
different ways. What are you afraid of? That God will show himself somewhere other than inside
these walls? That people will find him in their own lives and leave your antiquated rituals behind?
Religions evolve! The mind finds answers, the heart grapples with new truths. My father was on
your quest! A parallel path! Why couldn’t you see that? God is not some omnipotent authority
looking down from above, threatening to throw us into a pit of fire if we disobey. God is the energy
that flows through the synapses of our nervous system and the chambers of our hearts! God is in all
things!”
“Except science,” the camerlegno fired back, his eyes showing only pity. “Science, by
definition, is soulless. Divorced from the heart. Intellectual miracles like antimatter arrive in this
world with no ethical instructions attached. This in itself is perilous! But when science heralds its
Godless pursuits as the enlightened path? Promising answers to questions whose beauty is that they
have no answers?” He shook his head. “No.”
There was a moment of silence. The camerlegno felt suddenly tired as he returned Vittoria’s
unbending stare. This was not how it was supposed to be. Is this God’s final test?
It was Mortati who broke the spell. “The preferiti ,” he said in a horrified whisper. “Baggia
and the others. Please tell me you did not…”
The camerlegno turned to him, surprised by the pain in his voice. Certainly Mortati could
understand. Headlines carried science’s miracles every day. How long had it been for religion?
Centuries? Religion needed a miracle! Something to awaken a sleeping world. Bring them back to
the path of righteousness. Restore faith. The preferiti were not leaders anyway, they were
transformers–liberals prepared to embrace the new world and abandon the old ways! This was the
only way. A new leader. Young. Powerful. Vibrant. Miraculous. The preferiti served the church
far more effectively in death than they ever could alive. Horror and Hope. Offer four souls to save
millions . The world would remember them forever as martyrs. The church would raise glorious
tribute to their names. How many thousands have died for the glory of God? They are only four .
“The preferiti ,” Mortati repeated.
“I shared their pain,” the camerlegno defended, motioning to his chest. “And I too would die
for God, but my work is only just begun. They are singing in St. Peter’s Square!”
The camerlegno saw the horror in Mortati’s eyes and again felt confused. Was it the
morphine? Mortati was looking at him as if the camerlegno himself had killed these men with his
bare hands. I would do even that for God , the camerlegno thought, and yet he had not. The deeds
had been carried out by the Hassassin–a heathen soul tricked into thinking he was doing the work of
the Illuminati. I am Janus , the camerlegno had told him. I will prove my power . And he had. The
Hassassin’s hatred had made him God’s pawn.
“Listen to the singing,” the camerlegno said, smiling, his own heart rejoicing. “Nothing unites
hearts like the presence of evil. Burn a church and the community rises up, holding hands, singing
hymns of defiance as they rebuild. Look how they flock tonight. Fear has brought them home.
Forge modern demons for modern man. Apathy is dead. Show them the face of evil–Satanists
lurking among us–running our governments, our banks, our schools, threatening to obliterate the
very House of God with their misguided science. Depravity runs deep. Man must be vigilant. Seek
the goodness. Become the goodness!”
In the silence, the camerlegno hoped they now understood. The Illuminati had not resurfaced.
The Illuminati were long deceased. Only their myth was alive. The camerlegno had resurrected the
Illuminati as a reminder. Those who knew the Illuminati history relived their evil. Those who did
not, had learned of it and were amazed how blind they had been. The ancient demons had been
resurrected to awaken an indifferent world.
“But… the brands?” Mortati’s voice was stiff with outrage.
The camerlegno did not answer. Mortati had no way of knowing, but the brands had been
confiscated by the Vatican over a century ago. They had been locked away, forgotten and dust
covered, in the Papal Vault–the Pope’s private reliquary, deep within his Borgia apartments. The
Papal Vault contained those items the church deemed too dangerous for anyone’s eyes except the
Pope’s.
Why did they hide that which inspired fear? Fear brought people to God!
The vault’s key was passed down from Pope to Pope. Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca had
purloined the key and ventured inside; the myth of what the vault contained was bewitching–the
original manuscript for the fourteen unpublished books of the Bible known as the Apocrypha , the
third prophecy of Fatima, the first two having come true and the third so terrifying the church would
never reveal it. In addition to these, the camerlegno had found the Illuminati Collection–all the
secrets the church had uncovered after banishing the group from Rome… their contemptible Path of
Illumination… the cunning deceit of the Vatican’s head artist, Bernini… Europe’s top scientists
mocking religion as they secretly assembled in the Vatican’s own Castle St. Angelo. The collection
included a pentagon box containing iron brands, one of them the mythical Illuminati Diamond. This
was a part of Vatican history the ancients thought best forgotten. The camerlegno, however, had
disagreed.
“But the antimatter …” Vittoria demanded. “You risked destroying the Vatican!”
“There is no risk when God is at your side,” the camerlegno said. “This cause was His.”
“You’re insane!” she seethed.
“Millions were saved.”
“People were killed !”
“Souls were saved.”
“Tell that to my father and Max Kohler!”
“CERN’s arrogance needed to be revealed. A droplet of liquid that can vaporize a half mile?
And you call me mad?” The camerlegno felt a rage rising in him. Did they think his was a simple
charge? “Those who believe undergo great tests for God! God asked Abraham to sacrifice his
child! God commanded Jesus to endure crucifixion! And so we hang the symbol of the crucifix
before our eyes–bloody, painful, agonizing–to remind us of evil’s power! To keep our hearts
vigilant! The scars on Jesus’ body are a living reminder of the powers of darkness! My scars are a
living reminder! Evil lives, but the power of God will overcome!”
His shouts echoed off the back wall of the Sistine Chapel and then a profound silence fell.
Time seemed to stop. Michelangelo’s Last Judgment rose ominously behind him… Jesus casting
sinners into hell. Tears brimmed in Mortati’s eyes.
“What have you done, Carlo?” Mortati asked in a whisper. He closed his eyes, and a tear
rolled. “His Holiness ?”
A collective sigh of pain went up, as if everyone in the room had forgotten until that very
moment. The Pope. Poisoned.
“A vile liar,” the camerlegno said.
Mortati looked shattered. “What do you mean? He was honest! He… loved you.”
“And I him.” Oh, how I loved him! But the deceit! The broken vows to God!
The camerlegno knew they did not understand right now, but they would . When he told them,
they would see! His Holiness was the most nefarious deceiver the church had ever seen. The
camerlegno still remembered that terrible night. He had returned from his trip to CERN with news
of Vetra’s Genesis and of antimatter’s horrific power. The camerlegno was certain the Pope would
see the perils, but the Holy Father saw only hope in Vetra’s breakthrough. He even suggested the
Vatican fund Vetra’s work as a gesture of goodwill toward spiritually based scientific research.
Madness! The church investing in research that threatened to make the church obsolete?
Work that spawned weapons of mass destruction? The bomb that had killed his mother…
“But… you can’t!” the camerlegno had exclaimed.
“I owe a deep debt to science,” the Pope had replied. “Something I have hidden my entire life.
Science gave me a gift when I was a young man. A gift I have never forgotten.”
“I don’t understand. What does science have to offer a man of God ?”
“It is complicated,” the Pope had said. “I will need time to make you understand. But first,
there is a simple fact about me that you must know. I have kept it hidden all these years. I believe it
is time I told you.”
Then the Pope had told him the astonishing truth.
132
The camerlegno lay curled in a ball on the dirt floor in front of St. Peter’s tomb. The
Necropolis was cold, but it helped clot the blood flowing from the wounds he had torn at his own
flesh. His Holiness would not find him here. Nobody would find him here…
“It is complicated,” the Pope’s voice echoed in his mind. “I will need time to make you
understand…”
But the camerlegno knew no amount of time could make him understand.
Liar! I believed in you! GOD believed in you!
With a single sentence, the Pope had brought the camerlegno’s world crashing down around
him. Everything the camerlegno had ever believed about his mentor was shattered before his eyes.
The truth drilled into the camerlegno’s heart with such force that he staggered backward out of the
Pope’s office and vomited in the hallway.
“Wait!” the Pope had cried, chasing after him. “Please let me explain!”
But the camerlegno ran off. How could His Holiness expect him to endure any more? Oh, the
wretched depravity of it! What if someone else found out? Imagine the desecration to the church!
Did the Pope’s holy vows mean nothing?
The madness came quickly, screaming in his ears, until he awoke before St. Peter’s tomb. It
was then that God came to him with an awesome fierceness.
Yours is a Vengeful God!
Together, they made their plans. Together they would protect the church. Together they
would restore faith to this faithless world. Evil was everywhere. And yet the world had become
immune! Together they would unveil the darkness for the world to see… and God would overcome!
Horror and Hope. Then the world would believe!
God’s first test had been less horrible than the camerlegno imagined. Sneaking into the Papal
bed chambers… filling his syringe… covering the deceiver’s mouth as his body spasmed into death.
In the moonlight, the camerlegno could see in the Pope’s wild eyes there was something he wanted
to say.
But it was too late.
The Pope had said enough.
133
“The Pope fathered a child.”
Inside the Sistine Chapel, the camerlegno stood unwavering as he spoke. Five solitary words
of astonishing disclosure. The entire assembly seemed to recoil in unison. The cardinals’ accusing
miens evaporated into aghast stares, as if every soul in the room were praying the camerlegno was
wrong.
The Pope fathered a child .
Langdon felt the shock wave hit him too. Vittoria’s hand, tight in his, jolted, while Langdon’s
mind, already numb with unanswered questions, wrestled to find a center of gravity.
The camerlegno’s utterance seemed like it would hang forever in the air above them. Even in
the camerlegno’s frenzied eyes, Langdon could see pure conviction. Langdon wanted to disengage,
tell himself he was lost in some grotesque nightmare, soon to wake up in a world that made sense.
“This must be a lie!” one of the cardinals yelled.
“I will not believe it!” another protested. “His Holiness was as devout a man as ever lived!”
It was Mortati who spoke next, his voice thin with devastation. “My friends. What the
camerlegno says is true.” Every cardinal in the chapel spun as though Mortati had just shouted an
obscenity. “The Pope indeed fathered a child.”
The cardinals blanched with dread.
The camerlegno looked stunned. “You knew ? But… how could you possibly know this?”
Mortati sighed. “When His Holiness was elected… I was the Devil’s Advocate.”
There was a communal gasp.
Langdon understood. This meant the information was probably true. The infamous “Devil’s
Advocate” was the authority when it came to scandalous information inside the Vatican. Skeletons
in a Pope’s closet were dangerous, and prior to elections, secret inquiries into a candidate’s
background were carried out by a lone cardinal who served as the “Devil’s Advocate”–that
individual responsible for unearthing reasons why the eligible cardinals should not become Pope.
The Devil’s Advocate was appointed in advance by the reigning Pope in preparation for his own
death. The Devil’s Advocate was never supposed to reveal his identity. Ever .
“I was the Devil’s Advocate,” Mortati repeated. “That is how I found out.”
Mouths dropped. Apparently tonight was a night when all the rules were going out the
window.
The camerlegno felt his heart filling with rage. “And you… told no one ?”
“I confronted His Holiness,” Mortati said. “And he confessed. He explained the entire story
and asked only that I let my heart guide my decision as to whether or not to reveal his secret.”
“And your heart told you to bury the information?”
“He was the runaway favorite for the papacy. People loved him. The scandal would have hurt
the church deeply.”
“But he fathered a child ! He broke his sacred vow of celibacy!” The camerlegno was
screaming now. He could hear his mother’s voice. A promise to God is the most important promise
of all. Never break a promise to God . “The Pope broke his vow!”
Mortati looked delirious with angst. “Carlo, his love… was chaste . He had broken no vow.
He didn’t explain it to you?”
“Explain what?” The camerlegno remembered running out of the Pope’s office while the Pope
was calling to him. Let me explain!
Slowly, sadly, Mortati let the tale unfold. Many years ago, the Pope, when he was still just a
priest, had fallen in love with a young nun. Both of them had taken vows of celibacy and never even
considered breaking their covenant with God. Still, as they fell deeper in love, although they could
resist the temptations of the flesh, they both found themselves longing for something they never
expected–to participate in God’s ultimate miracle of creation–a child. Their child. The yearning,
especially in her, became overwhelming. Still, God came first. A year later, when the frustration
had reached almost unbearable proportions, she came to him in a whirl of excitement. She had just
read an article about a new miracle of science–a process by which two people, without ever having
sexual relations, could have a child. She sensed this was a sign from God. The priest could see the
happiness in her eyes and agreed. A year later she had a child through the miracle of artificial
insemination…
“This cannot… be true,” the camerlegno said, panicked, hoping it was the morphine washing
over his senses. Certainly he was hearing things.
Mortati now had tears in his eyes. “Carlo, this is why His Holiness has always had an
affection for the sciences. He felt he owed a debt to science. Science let him experience the joys of
fatherhood without breaking his vow of celibacy. His Holiness told me he had no regrets except
one–that his advancing stature in the church prohibited him from being with the woman he loved
and seeing his infant grow up.”
Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca felt the madness setting in again. He wanted to claw at his flesh.
How could I have known?
“The Pope committed no sin, Carlo. He was chaste.”
“But…” The camerlegno searched his anguished mind for any kind of rationale. “Think of the
jeopardy… of his deeds.” His voice felt weak. “What if this whore of his came forward? Or, heaven
forbid, his child ? Imagine the shame the church would endure.”
Mortati’s voice was tremulous. “The child has already come forward.”
Everything stopped.
“Carlo…?” Mortati crumbled. “His Holiness’s child… is you .”
At that moment, the camerlegno could feel the fire of faith dim in his heart. He stood
trembling on the altar, framed by Michelangelo’s towering Last Judgment . He knew he had just
glimpsed hell itself. He opened his mouth to speak, but his lips wavered, soundless.
“Don’t you see?” Mortati choked. “That is why His Holiness came to you in the hospital in
Palermo when you were a boy. That is why he took you in and raised you. The nun he loved was
Maria… your mother. She left the nunnery to raise you, but she never abandoned her strict devotion
to God. When the Pope heard she had died in an explosion and that you, his son, had miraculously
survived… he swore to God he would never leave you alone again. Carlo, your parents were both
virgins. They kept their vows to God. And still they found a way to bring you into the world. You
were their miraculous child.”
The camerlegno covered his ears, trying to block out the words. He stood paralyzed on the
altar. Then, with his world yanked from beneath him, he fell violently to his knees and let out a wail
of anguish.
Seconds. Minutes. Hours.
Time seemed to have lost all meaning inside the four walls of the chapel. Vittoria felt herself
slowly breaking free of the paralysis that seemed to have gripped them all. She let go of Langdon’s
hand and began moving through the crowd of cardinals. The chapel door seemed miles away, and
she felt like she was moving underwater… slow motion.
As she maneuvered through the robes, her motion seemed to pull others from their trance.
Some of the cardinals began to pray. Others wept. Some turned to watch her go, their blank
expressions turning slowly to a foreboding cognition as she moved toward the door. She had almost
reached the back of the crowd when a hand caught her arm. The touch was frail but resolute. She
turned, face to face with a wizened cardinal. His visage was clouded by fear.
“No,” the man whispered. “You cannot.”
Vittoria stared, incredulous.
Another cardinal was at her side now. “We must think before we act.”
And another. “The pain this could cause…”
Vittoria was surrounded. She looked at them all, stunned. “But these deeds here today,
tonight… certainly the world should know the truth.”
“My heart agrees,” the wizened cardinal said, still holding her arm, “and yet it is a path from
which there is no return. We must consider the shattered hopes. The cynicism. How could the
people ever trust again?”
Suddenly, more cardinals seemed to be blocking her way. There was a wall of black robes
before her. “Listen to the people in the square,” one said. “What will this do to their hearts? We
must exercise prudence.”
“We need time to think and pray,” another said. “We must act with foresight. The
repercussions of this…”
“He killed my father!” Vittoria said. “He killed his own father!”
“I’m certain he will pay for his sins,” the cardinal holding her arm said sadly.
Vittoria was certain too, and she intended to ensure he paid. She tried to push toward the
door again, but the cardinals huddled closer, their faces frightened.
“What are you going to do?” she exclaimed. “Kill me?”
The old men blanched, and Vittoria immediately regretted her words. She could see these men
were gentle souls. They had seen enough violence tonight. They meant no threat. They were simply
trapped. Scared. Trying to get their bearings.
“I want…” the wizened cardinal said, “… to do what is right.”
“Then you will let her out,” a deep voice declared behind her. The words were calm but
absolute. Robert Langdon arrived at her side, and she felt his hand take hers. “Ms. Vetra and I are
leaving this chapel. Right now.”
Faltering, hesitant, the cardinals began to step aside.
“Wait!” It was Mortati. He moved toward them now, down the center aisle, leaving the
camerlegno alone and defeated on the altar. Mortati looked older all of a sudden, wearied beyond
his years. His motion was burdened with shame. He arrived, putting a hand on Langdon’s shoulder
and one on Vittoria’s as well. Vittoria felt sincerity in his touch. The man’s eyes were more tearful
now.
“Of course you are free to go,” Mortati said. “Of course.” The man paused, his grief almost
tangible. “I ask only this…” He stared down at his feet a long moment then back up at Vittoria and
Langdon. “Let me do it. I will go into the square right now and find a way. I will tell them. I don’t
know how… but I will find a way. The church’s confession should come from within. Our failures
should be our own to expose.”
Mortati turned sadly back toward the altar. “Carlo, you have brought this church to a
disastrous juncture.” He paused, looking around. The altar was bare.
There was a rustle of cloth down the side aisle, and the door clicked shut.
The camerlegno was gone.
134
Camerlegno Ventresca’s white robe billowed as he moved down the hallway away from the
Sistine Chapel. The Swiss Guards had seemed perplexed when he emerged all alone from the
chapel and told them he needed a moment of solitude. But they had obeyed, letting him go.
Now as he rounded the corner and left their sight, the camerlegno felt a maelstrom of
emotions like nothing he thought possible in human experience. He had poisoned the man he called
“Holy Father,” the man who addressed him as “my son.” The camerlegno had always believed the
words “father” and “son” were religious tradition, but now he knew the diabolical truth–the words
had been literal .
Like that fateful night weeks ago, the camerlegno now felt himself reeling madly through the
darkness.
It was raining the morning the Vatican staff banged on the camerlegno’s door, awakening him
from a fitful sleep. The Pope, they said, was not answering his door or his phone. The clergy were
frightened. The camerlegno was the only one who could enter the Pope’s chambers unannounced.
The camerlegno entered alone to find the Pope, as he was the night before, twisted and dead
in his bed. His Holiness’s face looked like that of Satan. His tongue black like death. The Devil
himself had been sleeping in the Pope’s bed.
The camerlegno felt no remorse. God had spoken.
Nobody would see the treachery… not yet. That would come later.
He announced the terrible news–His Holiness was dead of a stroke. Then the camerlegno
prepared for conclave.
Mother Maria’s voice was whispering in his ear. “Never break a promise to God.”
“I hear you, Mother,” he replied. “It is a faithless world. They need to be brought back to the
path of righteousness. Horror and Hope. It is the only way.”
“Yes,” she said. “If not you… then who? Who will lead the church out of darkness?”
Certainly not one of the preferiti . They were old… walking death… liberals who would
follow the Pope, endorsing science in his memory, seeking modern followers by abandoning the
ancient ways. Old men desperately behind the times, pathetically pretending they were not. They
would fail, of course. The church’s strength was its tradition, not its transience. The whole world
was transitory. The church did not need to change, it simply needed to remind the world it was
relevant! Evil lives! God will overcome!
The church needed a leader. Old men do not inspire! Jesus inspired! Young, vibrant,
powerful… Miraculous .
“Enjoy your tea,” the camerlegno told the four preferiti , leaving them in the Pope’s private
library before conclave. “Your guide will be here soon.”
The preferiti thanked him, all abuzz that they had been offered a chance to enter the famed
Passetto. Most uncommon! The camerlegno, before leaving them, had unlocked the door to the
Passetto, and exactly on schedule, the door had opened, and a foreign-looking priest with a torch
had ushered the excited preferiti in.
The men had never come out.
They will be the Horror. I will be the Hope.
No… I am the horror .
The camerlegno staggered now through the darkness of St. Peter’s Basilica. Somehow,
through the insanity and guilt, through the images of his father, through the pain and revelation,
even through the pull of the morphine… he had found a brilliant clarity. A sense of destiny. I know
my purpose , he thought, awed by the lucidity of it.
From the beginning, nothing tonight had gone exactly as he had planned. Unforeseen
obstacles had presented themselves, but the camerlegno had adapted, making bold adjustments.
Still, he had never imagined tonight would end this way, and yet now he saw the preordained
majesty of it.
It could end no other way.
Oh, what terror he had felt in the Sistine Chapel, wondering if God had forsaken him! Oh,
what deeds He had ordained! He had fallen to his knees, awash with doubt, his ears straining for
the voice of God but hearing only silence. He had begged for a sign. Guidance. Direction. Was this
God’s will? The church destroyed by scandal and abomination? No! God was the one who had
willed the camerlegno to act! Hadn’t He?
Then he had seen it. Sitting on the altar. A sign. Divine communication–something ordinary
seen in an extraordinary light. The crucifix. Humble, wooden. Jesus on the cross. In that moment, it
had all come clear… the camerlegno was not alone. He would never be alone.
This was His will… His meaning.
God had always asked great sacrifice of those he loved most. Why had the camerlegno been
so slow to understand? Was he too fearful? Too humble? It made no difference. God had found a
way. The camerlegno even understood now why Robert Langdon had been saved. It was to bring
the truth. To compel this ending.
This was the sole path to the church’s salvation!
The camerlegno felt like he was floating as he descended into the Niche of the Palliums. The
surge of morphine seemed relentless now, but he knew God was guiding him.
In the distance, he could hear the cardinals clamoring in confusion as they poured from the
chapel, yelling commands to the Swiss Guard.
But they would never find him. Not in time.
The camerlegno felt himself drawn… faster… descending the stairs into the sunken area
where the ninety-nine oil lamps shone brightly. God was returning him to Holy Ground. The
camerlegno moved toward the grate covering the hole that led down to the Necropolis. The
Necropolis is where this night would end. In the sacred darkness below. He lifted an oil lamp,
preparing to descend.
But as he moved across the Niche, the camerlegno paused. Something about this felt wrong.
How did this serve God? A solitary and silent end? Jesus had suffered before the eyes of the entire
world. Surely this could not be God’s will! The camerlegno listened for the voice of his God, but
heard only the blurring buzz of drugs.
“Carlo .” It was his mother. “God has plans for you .”
Bewildered, the camerlegno kept moving.
Then, without warning, God arrived.
The camerlegno stopped short, staring. The light of the ninety-nine oil lanterns had thrown the
camerlegno’s shadow on the marble wall beside him. Giant and fearful. A hazy form surrounded by
golden light. With flames flickering all around him, the camerlegno looked like an angel ascending
to heaven. He stood a moment, raising his arms to his sides, watching his own image. Then he
turned, looking back up the stairs.
God’s meaning was clear.
Three minutes had passed in the chaotic hallways outside the Sistine Chapel, and still nobody
could locate the camerlegno. It was as if the man had been swallowed up by the night. Mortati was
about to demand a full-scale search of Vatican City when a roar of jubilation erupted outside in St.
Peter’s Square. The spontaneous celebration of the crowd was tumultuous. The cardinals all
exchanged startled looks.
Mortati closed his eyes. “God help us.”
For the second time that evening, the College of Cardinals flooded onto St. Peter’s Square.
Langdon and Vittoria were swept up in the jostling crowd of cardinals, and they too emerged into
the night air. The media lights and cameras were all pivoted toward the basilica. And there, having
just stepped onto the sacred Papal Balcony located in the exact center of the towering façade,
Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca stood with his arms raised to the heavens. Even far away, he looked
like purity incarnate. A figurine. Dressed in white. Flooded with light.
The energy in the square seemed to grow like a cresting wave, and all at once the Swiss Guard
barriers gave way. The masses streamed toward the basilica in a euphoric torrent of humanity. The
onslaught rushed forward–people crying, singing, media cameras flashing. Pandemonium. As the
people flooded in around the front of the basilica, the chaos intensified, until it seemed nothing
could stop it.
And then something did.
High above, the camerlegno made the smallest of gestures. He folded his hands before him.
Then he bowed his head in silent prayer. One by one, then dozens by dozens, then hundreds by
hundreds, the people bowed their heads along with him.
The square fell silent… as if a spell had been cast.
In his mind, swirling and distant now, the camerlegno’s prayers were a torrent of hopes and
sorrows… forgive me, Father… Mother… full of grace… you are the church… may you understand
this sacrifice of your only begotten son .
Oh, my Jesus… save us from the fires of hell… take all souls to heaven, especially, those most
in need of thy mercy…
The camerlegno did not open his eyes to see the throngs below him, the television cameras,
the whole world watching. He could feel it in his soul. Even in his anguish, the unity of the moment
was intoxicating. It was as if a connective web had shot out in all directions around the globe. In
front of televisions, at home, and in cars, the world prayed as one. Like synapses of a giant heart all
firing in tandem, the people reached for God, in dozens of languages, in hundreds of countries. The
words they whispered were newborn and yet as familiar to them as their own voices… ancient
truths… imprinted on the soul.
The consonance felt eternal.
As the silence lifted, the joyous strains of singing began to rise again.
He knew the moment had come.
Most Holy Trinity, I offer Thee the most precious Body, Blood, Soul… in reparation for the
outrages, sacrileges, and indifferences…
The camerlegno already felt the physical pain setting in. It was spreading across his skin like a
plague, making him want to claw at his flesh like he had weeks ago when God had first come to
him. Do not forget what pain Jesus endured . He could taste the fumes now in his throat. Not even
the morphine could dull the bite.
My work here is done .
The Horror was his. The Hope was theirs.
In the Niche of the Palliums, the camerlegno had followed God’s will and anointed his body.
His hair. His face. His linen robe. His flesh. He was soaking now with the sacred, vitreous oils from
the lamps. They smelled sweet like his mother, but they burned. His would be a merciful
ascension. Miraculous and swift. And he would leave behind not scandal… but a new strength and
wonder.
He slipped his hand into the pocket of his robe and fingered the small, golden lighter he had
brought with him from the Pallium incendiario .
He whispered a verse from Judgments. And when the flame went up toward heaven, the angel
of the Lord ascended in the flame .
He positioned his thumb.
They were singing in St. Peter’s Square…
The vision the world witnessed no one would ever forget.
High above on the balcony, like a soul tearing free of its corporeal restrains, a luminous pyre
of flame erupted from the camerlegno’s center. The fire shot upward, engulfing his entire body
instantly. He did not scream. He raised his arms over his head and looked toward heaven. The
conflagration roared around him, entirely shrouding his body in a column of light. It raged for what
seemed like an eternity, the whole world bearing witness. The light flared brighter and brighter.
Then, gradually, the flames dissipated. The camerlegno was gone. Whether he had collapsed behind
the balustrade or evaporated into thin air was impossible to tell. All that was left was a cloud of
smoke spiraling skyward over Vatican City.
135
Dawn came late to Rome.
An early rainstorm had washed the crowds from St. Peter’s Square. The media stayed on,
huddling under umbrellas and in vans, commentating on the evening’s events. Across the world,
churches overflowed. It was a time of reflection and discussion… in all religions. Questions
abounded, and yet the answers seemed only to bring deeper questions. Thus far, the Vatican had
remained silent, issuing no statement whatsoever.
Deep in the Vatican Grottoes, Cardinal Mortati knelt alone before the open sarcophagus. He
reached in and closed the old man’s blackened mouth. His Holiness looked peaceful now. In quiet
repose for eternity.
At Mortati’s feet was a golden urn, heavy with ashes. Mortati had gathered the ashes himself
and brought them here. “A chance for forgiveness,” he said to His Holiness, laying the urn inside
the sarcophagus at the Pope’s side. “No love is greater than that of a father for His son.” Mortati
tucked the urn out of sight beneath the papal robes. He knew this sacred grotto was reserved
exclusively for the relics of Popes, but somehow Mortati sensed this was appropriate.
“Signore?” someone said, entering the grottoes. It was Lieutenant Chartrand. He was
accompanied by three Swiss Guards. “They are ready for you in conclave.”
Mortati nodded. “In a moment.” He gazed one last time into the sarcophagus before him, and
then stood up. He turned to the guards. “It is time for His Holiness to have the peace he has earned.”
The guards came forward and with enormous effort slid the lid of the Pope’s sarcophagus
back into place. It thundered shut with finality.
Mortati was alone as he crossed the Borgia Courtyard toward the Sistine Chapel. A damp
breeze tossed his robe. A fellow cardinal emerged from the Apostolic Palace and strode beside him.
“May I have the honor of escorting you to conclave, signore?”
“The honor is mine.”
“Signore,” the cardinal said, looking troubled. “The college owes you an apology for last
night. We were blinded by–”
“Please,” Mortati replied. “Our minds sometimes see what our hearts wish were true.”
The cardinal was silent a long time. Finally he spoke. “Have you been told? You are no longer
our Great Elector.”
Mortati smiled. “Yes. I thank God for small blessings.”
“The college insisted you be eligible.”
“It seems charity is not dead in the church.”
“You are a wise man. You would lead us well.”
“I am an old man. I would lead you briefly.”
They both laughed.
As they reached the end of the Borgia Courtyard, the cardinal hesitated. He turned to Mortati
with a troubled mystification, as if the precarious awe of the night before had slipped back into his
heart.
“Were you aware,” the cardinal whispered, “that we found no remains on the balcony?”
Mortati smiled. “Perhaps the rain washed them away.”
The man looked to the stormy heavens. “Yes, perhaps…”
136
The midmorning sky still hung heavy with clouds as the Sistine Chapel’s chimney gave up its
first faint puffs of white smoke. The pearly wisps curled upward toward the firmament and slowly
dissipated.
Far below, in St. Peter’s Square, reporter Gunther Glick watched in reflective silence. The
final chapter…
Chinita Macri approached him from behind and hoisted her camera onto her shoulder. “It’s
time,” she said.
Glick nodded dolefully. He turned toward her, smoothed his hair, and took a deep breath. My
last transmission , he thought. A small crowd had gathered around them to watch.
“Live in sixty seconds,” Macri announced.
Glick glanced over his shoulder at the roof of the Sistine Chapel behind him. “Can you get the
smoke?”
Macri patiently nodded. “I know how to frame a shot, Gunther.”
Glick felt dumb. Of course she did. Macri’s performance behind the camera last night had
probably won her the Pulitzer. His performance, on the other hand… he didn’t want to think about
it. He was sure the BBC would let him go; no doubt they would have legal troubles from numerous
powerful entities… CERN and George Bush among them.
“You look good,” Chinita patronized, looking out from behind her camera now with a hint of
concern. “I wonder if I might offer you…” She hesitated, holding her tongue.
“Some advice ?”
Macri sighed. “I was only going to say that there’s no need to go out with a bang.”
“I know,” he said. “You want a straight wrap.”
“The straightest in history. I’m trusting you.”
Glick smiled. A straight wrap? Is she crazy? A story like last night’s deserved so much
more. A twist. A final bombshell. An unforeseen revelation of shocking truth.
Fortunately, Glick had just the ticket waiting in the wings…
* * *
“You’re on in… five… four… three…”
As Chinita Macri looked through her camera, she sensed a sly glint in Glick’s eye. I was
insane to let him do this , she thought. What was I thinking?
But the moment for second thoughts had passed. They were on.
“Live from Vatican City,” Glick announced on cue, “this is Gunther Glick reporting.” He
gave the camera a solemn stare as the white smoke rose behind him from the Sistine Chapel.
“Ladies and gentlemen, it is now official . Cardinal Saverio Mortati, a seventy-nine-year-old
progressive, has just been elected the next Pope of Vatican City. Although an unlikely candidate,
Mortati was chosen by an unprecedented unanimous vote by the College of Cardinals.”
As Macri watched him, she began to breathe easier. Glick seemed surprisingly professional
today. Even austere. For the first time in his life, Glick actually looked and sounded somewhat like
a newsman.
“And as we reported earlier,” Glick added, his voice intensifying perfectly, “the Vatican has
yet to offer any statement whatsoever regarding the miraculous events of last night.”
Good . Chinita’s nervousness waned some more. So far, so good .
Glick’s expression grew sorrowful now. “And though last night was a night of wonder, it was
also a night of tragedy. Four cardinals perished in yesterday’s conflict, along with Commander
Olivetti and Captain Rocher of the Swiss Guard, both in the line of duty. Other casualties include
Leonardo Vetra, the renowned CERN physicist and pioneer of antimatter technology, as well as
Maximilian Kohler, the director of CERN, who apparently came to Vatican City in an effort to help
but reportedly passed away in the process. No official report has been issued yet on Mr. Kohler’s
death, but conjecture is that he died due to complications brought on by a long-time illness.”
Macri nodded. The report was going perfectly. Just as they discussed.
“And in the wake of the explosion in the sky over the Vatican last night, CERN’s antimatter
technology has become the hot topic among scientists, sparking excitement and controversy. A
statement read by Mr. Kohler’s assistant in Geneva, Sylvie Baudeloque, announced this morning
that CERN’s board of directors, although enthusiastic about antimatter’s potential, are suspending
all research and licensing until further inquiries into its safety can be examined.”
Excellent , Macri thought. Home stretch .
“Notably absent from our screens tonight,” Glick reported, “is the face of Robert Langdon,
the Harvard professor who came to Vatican City yesterday to lend his expertise during this
Illuminati crisis. Although originally thought to have perished in the antimatter blast, we now have
reports that Langdon was spotted in St. Peter’s Square after the explosion. How he got there is still
speculation, although a spokesman from Hospital Tiberina claims that Mr. Langdon fell out of the
sky into the Tiber River shortly after midnight, was treated, and released.” Glick arched his
eyebrows at the camera. “And if that is true… it was indeed a night of miracles.”
Perfect ending! Macri felt herself smiling broadly. Flawless wrap! Now sign off!
But Glick did not sign off. Instead, he paused a moment and then stepped toward the camera.
He had a mysterious smile. “But before we sign off…”
No!
“… I would like to invite a guest to join me.”
Chinita’s hands froze on the camera. A guest? What the hell is he doing? What guest! Sign
off! But she knew it was too late. Glick had committed.
“The man I am about to introduce,” Glick said, “is an American… a renowned scholar.”
Chinita hesitated. She held her breath as Glick turned to the small crowd around them and
motioned for his guest to step forward. Macri said a silent prayer. Please tell me he somehow
located Robert Langdon… and not some Illuminati-conspiracy nutcase .
But as Glick’s guest stepped out, Macri’s heart sank. It was not Robert Langdon at all. It was
a bald man in blue jeans and a flannel shirt. He had a cane and thick glasses. Macri felt terror.
Nutcase!
“May I introduce,” Glick announced, “the renowned Vatican scholar from De Paul University
in Chicago. Dr. Joseph Vanek.”
Macri now hesitated as the man joined Glick on camera. This was no conspiracy buff; Macri
had actually heard of this guy.
“Dr. Vanek,” Glick said. “You have some rather startling information to share with us
regarding last night’s conclave.”
“I do indeed,” Vanek said. “After a night of such surprises, it is hard to imagine there are any
surprises left… and yet…” He paused.
Glick smiled. “And yet, there is a strange twist to all this.”
Vanek nodded. “Yes. As perplexing as this will sound, I believe the College of Cardinals
unknowingly elected two Popes this weekend.”
Macri almost dropped the camera.
Glick gave a shrewd smile. “Two Popes, you say?”
The scholar nodded. “Yes. I should first say that I have spent my life studying the laws of
papal election. Conclave judicature is extremely complex, and much of it is now forgotten or
ignored as obsolete. Even the Great Elector is probably not aware of what I am about to reveal.
Nonetheless… according to the ancient forgotten laws put forth in the Romano Pontifici Eligendo,
Numero 63 … balloting is not the only method by which a Pope can be elected. There is another,
more divine method. It is called ‘Acclamation by Adoration.’” He paused. “And it happened last
night.”
Glick gave his guest a riveted look. “Please, go on.”
“As you may recall,” the scholar continued, “last night, when Camerlegno Carlo Ventresca
was standing on the roof of the basilica, all of the cardinals below began calling out his name in
unison.”
“Yes, I recall.”
“With that image in mind, allow me to read verbatim from the ancient electoral laws.” The
man pulled some papers from his pocket, cleared his throat, and began to read. “‘Election by
Adoration occurs when… all the cardinals, as if by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, freely and
spontaneously, unanimously and aloud, proclaim one individual’s name.’”
Glick smiled. “So you’re saying that last night, when the cardinals chanted Carlo Ventresca’s
name together, they actually elected him Pope?”
“They did indeed. Furthermore, the law states that Election by Adoration supercedes the
cardinal eligibility requirement and permits any clergyman–ordained priest, bishop, or cardinal–to
be elected. So, as you can see, the camerlegno was perfectly qualified for papal election by this
procedure.” Dr. Vanek looked directly into the camera now. “The facts are these… Carlo Ventresca
was elected Pope last night. He reigned for just under seventeen minutes. And had he not ascended
miraculously into a pillar of fire, he would now be buried in the Vatican Grottoes along with the
other Popes.”
“Thank you, doctor.” Glick turned to Macri with a mischievous wink. “Most illuminating…”
137
High atop the steps of the Roman Coliseum, Vittoria laughed and called down to him.
“Robert, hurry up! I knew I should have married a younger man!” Her smile was magic.
He struggled to keep up, but his legs felt like stone. “Wait,” he begged. “Please…”
There was a pounding in his head.
Robert Langdon awoke with a start.
Darkness.
He lay still for a long time in the foreign softness of the bed, unable to figure out where he
was. The pillows were goose down, oversized and wonderful. The air smelled of potpourri. Across
the room, two glass doors stood open to a lavish balcony, where a light breeze played beneath a
glistening cloud-swept moon. Langdon tried to remember how he had gotten here… and where here
was.
Surreal wisps of memory sifted back into his consciousness…
A pyre of mystical fire… an angel materializing from out of the crowd… her soft hand taking
his and leading him into the night… guiding his exhausted, battered body through the streets…
leading him here… to this suite… propping him half-sleeping in a scalding hot shower… leading
him to this bed… and watching over him as he fell asleep like the dead .
In the dimness now, Langdon could see a second bed. The sheets were tousled, but the bed
was empty. From one of the adjoining rooms, he could hear the faint, steady stream of a shower.
As he gazed at Vittoria’s bed, he saw a boldly embroidered seal on her pillowcase. It read:
HOTEL BERNINI. Langdon had to smile. Vittoria had chosen well. Old World luxury overlooking
Bernini’s Triton Fountain… there was no more fitting hotel in all of Rome.
As Langdon lay there, he heard a pounding and realized what had awoken him. Someone was
knocking at the door. It grew louder.
Confused, Langdon got up. Nobody knows we’re here , he thought, feeling a trace of
uneasiness. Donning a luxuriant Hotel Bernini robe, he walked out of the bedroom into the suite’s
foyer. He stood a moment at the heavy oak door, and then pulled it open.
A powerful man adorned in lavish purple and yellow regalia stared down at him. “I am
Lieutenant Chartrand,” the man said. “Vatican Swiss Guard.”
Langdon knew full well who he was. “How… how did you find us?”
“I saw you leave the square last night. I followed you. I’m relieved you’re still here.”
Langdon felt a sudden anxiety, wondering if the cardinals had sent Chartrand to escort
Langdon and Vittoria back to Vatican City. After all, the two of them were the only two people
beyond the College of Cardinals who knew the truth . They were a liability.
“His Holiness asked me to give this to you,” Chartrand said, handing over an envelope sealed
with the Vatican signet. Langdon opened the envelope and read the handwritten note.
Mr. Langdon and Ms. Vetra,
Although it is my profound desire to request your discretion in the matters of the
past 24 hours, I cannot possibly presume to ask more of you than you have already given.
I therefore humbly retreat hoping only that you let your hearts guide you in this matter.
The world seems a better place today… maybe the questions are more powerful than the
answers.
My door is always open,
His Holiness, Saverio Mortati
Langdon read the message twice. The College of Cardinals had obviously chosen a noble and
munificent leader.
Before Langdon could say anything, Chartrand produced a small package. “A token of thanks
from His Holiness.”
Langdon took the package. It was heavy, wrapped in brown paper.
“By his decree,” Chartrand said, “this artifact is on indefinite loan to you from the sacred
Papal Vault. His Holiness asks only that in your last will and testament you ensure it finds its way
home.”
Langdon opened the package and was struck speechless. It was the brand. The Illuminati
Diamond .
Chartrand smiled. “May peace be with you.” He turned to go.
“Thank… you,” Langdon managed, his hands trembling around the precious gift.
The guard hesitated in the hall. “Mr. Langdon, may I ask you something?”
“Of course.”
“My fellow guards and I are curious. Those last few minutes… what happened up there in
the helicopter?”
Langdon felt a rush of anxiety. He knew this moment was coming–the moment of truth. He
and Vittoria had talked about it last night as they stole away from St. Peter’s Square. And they had
made their decision. Even before the Pope’s note.
Vittoria’s father had dreamed his antimatter discovery would bring about a spiritual
awakening. Last night’s events were no doubt not what he had intended, but the undeniable fact
remained… at this moment, around the world, people were considering God in ways they never had
before. How long the magic would last, Langdon and Vittoria had no idea, but they knew they could
never shatter the wonderment with scandal and doubt. The Lord works in strange ways , Langdon
told himself, wondering wryly if maybe… just maybe… yesterday had been God’s will after all.
“Mr. Langdon?” Chartrand repeated. “I was asking about the helicopter?”
Langdon gave a sad smile. “Yes, I know…” He felt the words flow not from his mind but
from his heart. “Perhaps it was the shock of the fall… but my memory… it seems… it’s all a
blur…”
Chartrand slumped. “You remember nothing ?”
Langdon sighed. “I fear it will remain a mystery forever.”
When Robert Langdon returned to the bedroom, the vision awaiting him stopped him in his
tracks. Vittoria stood on the balcony, her back to the railing, her eyes gazing deeply at him. She
looked like a heavenly apparition… a radiant silhouette with the moon behind her. She could have
been a Roman goddess, enshrouded in her white terrycloth robe, the drawstring cinched tight,
accentuating her slender curves. Behind her, a pale mist hung like a halo over Bernini’s Triton
Fountain.
Langdon felt wildly drawn to her… more than to any woman in his life. Quietly, he lay the
Illuminati Diamond and the Pope’s letter on his bedside table. There would be time to explain all of
that later. He went to her on the balcony.
Vittoria looked happy to see him. “You’re awake,” she said, in a coy whisper. “Finally .”
Langdon smiled. “Long day.”
She ran a hand through her luxuriant hair, the neck of her robe falling open slightly. “And
now… I suppose you want your reward.”
The comment took Langdon off guard. “I’m… sorry?”
“We’re adults, Robert. You can admit it. You feel a longing. I see it in your eyes. A deep,
carnal hunger.” She smiled. “I feel it too. And that craving is about to be satisfied.”
“It is?” He felt emboldened and took a step toward her.
“Completely .” She held up a room-service menu. “I ordered everything they’ve got.”
The feast was sumptuous. They dined together by moonlight… sitting on their balcony…
savoring frisée , truffles, and risotto. They sipped Dolcetto wine and talked late into the night.
Langdon did not need to be a symbologist to read the signs Vittoria was sending him. During
dessert of boysenberry cream with savoiardi and steaming Romcaffé , Vittoria pressed her bare
legs against his beneath the table and fixed him with a sultry stare. She seemed to be willing him to
set down his fork and carry her off in his arms.
But Langdon did nothing. He remained the perfect gentleman. Two can play at this game , he
thought, hiding a roguish smile.
When all the food was eaten, Langdon retired to the edge of his bed where he sat alone,
turning the Illuminati Diamond over and over in his hands, making repeated comments about the
miracle of its symmetry. Vittoria stared at him, her confusion growing to an obvious frustration.
“You find that ambigram terribly interesting, don’t you?” she demanded.
Langdon nodded. “Mesmerizing.”
“Would you say it’s the most interesting thing in this room?”
Langdon scratched his head, making a show of pondering it. “Well, there is one thing that
interests me more.”
She smiled and took a step toward him. “That being?”
“How you disproved that Einstein theory using tuna fish.”
Vittoria threw up her hands. “Dio mìo! Enough with the tuna fish! Don’t play with me, I’m
warning you.”
Langdon grinned. “Maybe for your next experiment, you could study flounders and prove
the earth is flat.”
Vittoria was steaming now, but the first faint hints of an exasperated smile appeared on her
lips. “For your information, professor, my next experiment will make scientific history. I plan to
prove neutrinos have mass.”
“Neutrinos have mass ?” Langdon shot her a stunned look. “I didn’t even know they were
Catholic!”
With one fluid motion, she was on him, pinning him down. “I hope you believe in life after
death, Robert Langdon.” Vittoria was laughing as she straddled him, her hands holding him down,
her eyes ablaze with a mischievous fire.
“Actually,” he choked, laughing harder now, “I’ve always had trouble picturing anything
beyond this world.”
“Really? So you’ve never had a religious experience? A perfect moment of glorious rapture?”
Langdon shook his head. “No, and I seriously doubt I’m the kind of man who could ever have
a religious experience.”
Vittoria slipped off her robe. “You’ve never been to bed with a yoga master, have you?”  

Catching fire

PART I "THE SPARK"

I clasp the flask between my hands even though the warmth from the tea has long since leached into the frozen air. My muscles are clenched tight against the cold. If a pack of wild dogs were to appear at this moment, the odds of scaling a tree before they attacked are not in my favor. I should get up, move around, and work the stiffness from my limbs. But instead I sit, as motionless as the rock beneath me, while the dawn begins to lighten the woods. I can't fight the sun. I can only watch helplessly as it drags me into a day that I've been dreading for months. By noon they will all be at my new house in the Victor's Village. The reporters, the camera crews, even Effie Trinket, my old escort, will have

made their way to District 12 from the Capitol. I wonder if Effie will still be wearing that silly pink wig, or if she'll be sporting some other unnatural color especially for the Victory Tour. There will be others waiting, too. A staff to cater to my every need on the long train trip. A prep team to beautify me for public appearances. My stylist and friend, Cinna, who designed the gorgeous outfits that first made the audience take notice of me in the Hunger Games. If it were up to me, I would try to forget the Hunger Games entirely. Never speak of them. Pretend they were nothing but a bad dream. But the Victory Tour makes that impossible. Strategically placed almost midway between the annual Games, it is the Capitol's way of keeping the horror fresh and immediate. Not only are we in the districts forced to remember the iron grip of the Capitol's power each year, we are forced to celebrate it. And this year, I am one of the stars
of the show. I will have to travel from district to district, to stand before the cheering crowds who secretly loathe me, to look down into the faces of the families whose children I have killed... The sun persists in rising, so I make myself stand. All my joints complain and my left leg has been asleep for so long that it takes several minutes of pacing to bring the feeling back into it. I've been in the woods three hours, but as I've made no real attempt at hunting, I have nothing to show for it. It doesn't matter for my mother and little sister, Prim, anymore. They can afford to buy butcher meat in town, although none of us likes it any better than fresh game. But my best friend, Gale Hawthorne, and his family will be depending on today's haul and I can't let them down. I start the hour-and-a-half trek it will take to cover our snare line. Back when we were in school, we had time in the afternoons to check the line and hunt and gather and still

get back to trade in town. But now that Gale has gone to work in the coal mines -- and I have nothing to do all day--I've taken over the job. By this time Gale will have clocked in at the

mines, taken the stomach-churning elevator ride into the depths of the earth, and be pounding away at a coal seam. I know what it's like down there. Every year in school, as part of our training, my class had to tour the mines. When I was little, it was just unpleasant. The claustrophobic tunnels, foul air, suffocating darkness on all sides. But after my father and several other miners were killed in an explosion, I could barely force myself onto the elevator. The annual trip became an enormous source of anxiety. Twice I made myself so sick in anticipation of it that my mother kept me home because she thought I had contracted the flu. I
think of Gale, who is only really alive in the woods, with its fresh air and sunlight and clean, flowing water. I don't know how he stands it. Well ... yes, I do. He stands it because it's the way to feed his mother and two younger brothers and sister. And here I am with buckets of money, far more than enough to feed both our families now, and he won't take a single coin. It's even hard for him to let me bring in meat, although he'd surely have kept my mother and Prim supplied if I'd been killed in the Games. I tell him he's doing me a favor, that it drives me nuts to sit around all day. Even so, I never drop off the game while he's at home. Which is easy since he works twelve hours a day. The only time I really get to see Gale now is on Sundays, when we meet up in the woods to hunt together. It's still the best day of the week, but it's not like it used to be before, when we could tell each other anything. The Games have spoiled even that. I keep

hoping that as time passes we'll regain the ease between us, but part of me knows it's futile. There's no going back. I get a good haul from the traps -- eight rabbits, two squirrels, and a beaver that swam into a wire contraption Gale designed himself. He's something of a whiz with snares, rigging them to bent saplings so they pull the kill out of the reach of predators, balancing logs on delicate stick triggers, weaving inescapable baskets to capture fish. As I go along, carefully resetting each snare, I know I can never quite replicate his eye for balance, his instinct for where the prey will cross the path. It's more than experience. It's a natural gift. Like the way I can shoot at an animal in almost complete darkness and still take it down with one arrow. By the time I make it back to the fence that surrounds District 12, the sun is well up. As always, I listen a moment, but there's no telltale hum of electrical current running through the chain
link. There hardly ever is, even though the thing is supposed to be charged full-time. I wriggle through the opening at the bottom of the fence and come up in the Meadow, just a stone's throw from my home. My old home. We still get to keep it since officially it's the designated dwelling of my mother and sister. If I should drop dead right now, they would have to return to it. But at present, they're both

happily installed in the new house in the Victor's Village, and I'm the only one who uses the squat little place where I was raised. To me, it's my real home. I go there now to switch my clothes. Exchange my father's old leather jacket for a fine wool coat that always seems too tight in the shoulders. Leave my soft, worn hunting boots for a pair of expensive machine-made shoes that my mother thinks are more appropriate for someone of my status. I've already

stowed my bow and arrows in a hollow log in the woods. Although time is ticking away, I allow myself a few minutes to sit in the kitchen. It has an abandoned quality with no fire on the hearth, no cloth on the table. I mourn my old life here. We barely scraped by, but I knew where I fit in, I knew what my place was in the tightly interwoven fabric that was our life. I wish I could go back to it because, in retrospect, it seems so secure compared with now, when I am so rich and so famous and so hated by the authorities in the Capitol. A wailing at the back door demands my attention. I open it to find Buttercup, Prim's scruffy old tomcat. He dislikes the new house almost as much as I do and always leaves it when my sister's at school. We've never been particularly fond of each other, but now we have this new bond. I let him in, feed him a chunk of beaver fat, and even rub him between the ears for a bit. "You're hideous, you
know that, right?" I ask him. Buttercup nudges my hand for more petting, but we have to go. "Come on, you." I scoop him up with one hand, grab my game bag with the other, and haul them both out onto the street. The cat springs free and disappears under a bush. The shoes pinch my toes as I crunch along the cinder street. Cutting down alleys and through backyards gets me to Gale's house in minutes. His mother, Hazelle, sees me through the window, where she's bent over the kitchen sink. She dries her hands on her apron and disappears to meet me at the door. I like Hazelle. Respect her. The explosion that killed my father took out her husband as well, leaving her with three boys and a baby due any day. Less than a week after she gave birth, she was out hunting the streets for work. The mines weren't an option, what with a baby to look after, but she managed to get laundry from some of the merchants in town.

At fourteen, Gale, the eldest of the kids, became the main supporter of the family. He was already signed up for tesserae, which entitled them to a meager supply of grain and oil in exchange for his entering his name extra times in the drawing to become a tribute. On top of that, even back then, he was a skilled trapper. But it wasn't enough to keep a family of five without Hazelle working her fingers to the bone on that washboard. In winter her hands got so red and cracked, they bled at the slightest provocation. Still would if it wasn't for a salve my mother concocted. But they are determined, Hazelle and Gale, that the other boys, twelve- year-old Rory and

ten-year-old Vick, and the baby, four-year-old Posy, will never have to sign up for tesserae. Hazelle smiles when she sees the game. She takes the beaver by the tail, feeling its
weight. "He's going to make a nice stew." Unlike Gale, she has no problem with our hunting arrangement. "Good pelt, too," I answer. It's comforting here with Hazelle. Weighing the merits of the game, just as we always have. She pours me a mug of herb tea, which I wrap my chilled fingers around gratefully. "You know, when I get back from the tour, I was thinking I might take Rory out with me sometimes. After school. Teach him to shoot." Hazelle nods. "That'd be good. Gale means to, but he's only got his Sundays, and I think he likes saving those for you." I can't stop the redness that floods my cheeks. It's stupid, of course. Hardly anybody knows me better than Hazelle. Knows the bond I share with Gale. I'm sure plenty of people assumed that we'd eventually get married even if I never gave it any thought. But that was before the Games. Before my fellow tribute, Peeta Mellark, announced he was madly in love with me. Our romance

became a key strategy for our survival in the arena. Only it wasn't just a strategy for Peeta. I'm not sure what it was for me. But I know now it was nothing but painful for Gale. My chest tightens as I think about how, on the Victory Tour, Peeta and I will have to present ourselves as lovers again. I gulp my tea even though it's too hot and push back from the table. "I better get going. Make myself presentable for the cameras." Hazelle hugs me. "Enjoy the food." "Absolutely," I say. My next stop is the Hob, where I've traditionally done the bulk of my trading. Years ago it was a warehouse to store coal, but when it fell into disuse, it became a meeting place for illegal trades and then blossomed into a full-time black market. If it attracts a somewhat criminal element, then I belong here, I guess. Hunting in the woods surrounding District 12 violates at least a dozen laws and is punishable by death. Although they
never mention it, I owe the people who frequent the Hob. Gale told me that Greasy Sae, the old woman who serves up soup, started a collection to sponsor Peeta and me during the Games. It was supposed to be just a Hob thing, but a lot of other people heard about it and chipped in. I don't know exactly how much it was, and the price of any gift in the arena was exorbitant. But for all I know, it made the difference between my life and death. It's still odd to drag open the front door with an empty game bag, with nothing to trade, and instead feel the heavy pocket of coins against my hip. I try to hit as many stalls as possible, spreading out my purchases of coffee, buns, eggs, yarn, and oil. As an afterthought, I buy three bottles of white liquor from a one-armed woman named Ripper, a victim of a mine accident who was smart enough to find a way to stay alive. The liquor isn't for my family. It's for Haymitch,

who acted as mentor for Peeta and me in the Games. He's surly, violent, and drunk most of the time. But he did his job -- more than his job--because for the first time in history, two tributes were allowed to win. So no matter who Haymitch is, I owe him, too. And that's for always. I'm getting the white liquor because a few weeks ago he ran out and there was none for sale and he had a withdrawal, shaking and screaming at terrifying things only he could see. He scared Prim to death and, frankly, it wasn't much fun for me to see him like that, either. Ever since then I've been sort of stockpiling the stuff just in case there's a shortage again. Cray, our Head Peacekeeper, frowns when he sees me with the bottles. He's an older man with a few strands of silver hair combed sideways above his bright red face. "That stuff's too strong for you, girl." He should know. Next to Haymitch, Cray drinks more than anyone I've ever met. "Aw, my
mother uses it in medicines," I say indifferently. "Well, it'd kill just about anything," he says, and slaps down a coin for a bottle. When I reach Greasy Sae's stall, I boost myself up to sit on the counter and order some soup, which looks to be some kind of gourd and bean mixture. A Peacekeeper named Darius comes up and buys a bowl while I'm eating. As law enforcers go, he's one of my favorites. Never really throwing his weight around, usually good for a joke. He's probably in his twenties, but he doesn't seem much older than I do. Something about his smile, his red hair that sticks out every which way, gives him a boyish quality. "Aren't you supposed to be on a train?" he asks me. "They're collecting me at noon," I answer.

"Shouldn't you look better?" he asks in a loud whisper. I can't help smiling at his teasing, in spite of my mood. "Maybe

a ribbon in your hair or something?" He flicks my braid with his hand and I brush him away. "Don't worry. By the time they get through with me I'll be unrecognizable," I say. "Good," he says. "Let's show a little district pride for a change, Miss Everdeen. Hm?" He shakes his head at Greasy Sae in mock disapproval and walks off to join his friends. "I'll want that bowl back," Greasy Sae calls after him, but since she's laughing, she doesn't sound particularly stern. "Gale going to see you off?" she asks me. "No, he wasn't on the list," I say. "I saw him Sunday, though." "Think he'd have made the list. Him being your cousin and all," she says wryly. It's just one more part of the lie the Capitol has concocted. When Peeta and I made it into the final eight in the Hunger Games, they sent reporters to do personal stories about us. When they asked about my friends, everyone directed them to Gale. But it wouldn't do, what with the romance I was playing out in
the arena, to have my best friend be Gale. He was too handsome, too male, and not the least bit willing to smile and play nice for the cameras. We do resemble each other, though, quite a bit. We have that Seam look. Dark straight hair, olive skin, gray eyes. So some genius made him my cousin. I didn't know about it until we were already home, on the platform at the train station, and my mother said, "Your cousins can hardly wait to see you!" Then I turned and saw Gale and Hazelle and all the kids waiting for me, so what could I do but go along? Greasy Sae knows we're not related, but even some of the people who have known us for years seem to have forgotten. "I just can't wait for the whole thing to be over," I whisper. "I know," says Greasy Sae. "But you've got to go through it to get to the end of it. Better not be late." A light snow starts to fall as I make my way to the Victor's Village. It's about a half-mile walk from the square in the

center of town, but it seems like another world entirely. It's a separate community built around a beautiful green, dotted with flowering bushes. There are twelve houses, each large enough to hold ten of the one I was raised in. Nine stand empty, as they always have. The three in use belong to Haymitch, Peeta, and me. The houses inhabited by my family and Peeta give off a warm glow of life. Lit windows, smoke from the chimneys, bunches of brightly colored corn affixed to the front doors as decoration for the upcoming Harvest Festival. However, Haymitch's house, despite the care taken by the grounds-keeper, exudes an air of abandonment and neglect. I brace myself at his front door, knowing it will be foul, then push inside. My nose immediately wrinkles in disgust. Haymitch refuses to let anyone in to clean and does a poor job himself. Over the years the odors of liquor and vomit, boiled cabbage andburned meat, unwashed clothes and mouse droppings have intermingled into a stench that brings tears to my eyes. I wade through a litter of discarded wrappings, broken glass, and bones to where I know I will find Haymitch. He sits at the kitchen table, his arms sprawled across the wood, his face in a puddle of liquor, snoring his head off. I nudge his shoulder. "Get up!" I say loudly, because I've learned there's no subtle way to wake him. His snoring stops for a moment, questioningly, and then resumes. I push him harder. "Get up, Haymitch. It's tour day!" I force the window up, inhaling deep breaths of the clean air outside. My feet shift through the garbage on the floor, and I unearth a tin coffeepot and fill it at the sink. The stove isn't completely out and I manage to coax the few live coals into a flame. I pour some ground coffee into the pot, enough to make sure the resulting brew will be good and strong, and set it on the stove to boil.

Haymitch is still dead to the world. Since nothing else has worked, I fill a basin with icy cold water, dump it on his head, and spring out of the way. A guttural animal sound comes from his throat. He jumps up, kicking his chair ten feet behind him and wielding a knife. I forgot he always sleeps with one clutched in his hand. I should have pried it from his fingers, but I've had a lot on my mind. Spewing profanity, he slashes the air a few moments before coming to his senses. He wipes his face on his shirtsleeve and turns to the windowsill where I perch, just in case I need to make a quick exit. "What are you doing?" he sputters. "You told me to wake you an hour before the cameras come," I say. "What?" he says. "Your idea," I insist. He seems to remember. "Why am I all wet?" "I couldn't shake you awake," I say. "Look, if you wanted to be babied, you should have asked Peeta." "Asked me what?" Just the sound of his voice twists my
stomach into a knot of unpleasant emotions like guilt, sadness, and fear. And longing. I might as well admit there's some of that, too. Only it has too much competition to ever win out. I watch as Peeta crosses to the table, the sunlight from the window picking up the glint of fresh snow in his blond hair. He looks strong and healthy, so different from the sick, starving boy I knew in the arena, and you can barely even notice his limp now. He sets a loaf of fresh-baked bread on the table and holds out his hand to Haymitch. "Asked you to wake me without giving me pneumonia," says Haymitch, passing over his knife. He pulls off his filthy shirt, revealing an equally soiled undershirt, and rubs himself down with the dry part. Peeta smiles and douses Haymitch's knife in white liquor from a bottle on the floor. He wipes the blade clean on his shirttail and slices the bread. Peeta keeps all of us in fresh baked goods. I hunt. He bakes. Haymitch

drinks. We have our own ways to stay busy, to keep thoughts of our time as contestants in the Hunger Games

at bay. It's not until he's handed Haymitch the heel that he even looks at me for the first time. "Would you like a piece?" "No, I ate at the Hob," I say. "But thank you." My voice doesn't sound like my own, it's so formal. Just as it's been every time I've spoken to Peeta since the cameras finished filming our happy homecoming and we returned to our real lives. "You're welcome," he says back stiffly. Haymitch tosses his shirt somewhere into the mess. "Brrr. You two have got a lot of warming up to do before showtime." He's right, of course. The audience will be expecting the pair of lovebirds who won the Hunger Games. Not two people who can barely look each other in the eye. But all I say is, "Take a bath, Haymitch." Then I swing out the
window, drop to the ground, and head across the green to my house. The snow has begun to stick and I leave a trail of footprints behind me. At the front door, I pause to knock the wet stuff from my shoes before I go in. My mother's been working day and night to make everything perfect for the cameras, so it's no time to be tracking up her shiny floors. I've barely stepped inside when she's there, holding my arm as if to stop me. "Don't worry, I'm taking them off here," I say, leaving my shoes on the mat. My mother gives an odd, breathy laugh and removes the game bag loaded with supplies from my shoulder. "It's just snow. Did you have a nice walk?" "Walk?" She knows I've been in the woods half the night. Then I see the man standing behind her in the kitchen doorway. One look at his tailored suit and surgically perfected features and I know he's from the Capitol. Something is wrong. "It was more like skating. It's really

getting slippery out there." "Someone's here to see you," says my mother. Her face is too pale and I can hear the anxiety she's trying to hide. "I thought they weren't due until noon." I pretend not to notice her state. "Did Cinna come early to help me get ready?" "No, Katniss, it's --" my mother begins. "This way, please, Miss Everdeen," says the man. He gestures down the hallway. It's weird to be ushered around your own home, but I know better than to comment on it. As I go, I give my mother a reassuring smile over my shoulder. "Probably more instructions for the tour." They've been sending me all kinds of stuff about my itinerary and what protocol will be observed in each district. But as I walk toward the door of the study, a door I have never even seen closed until this moment, I can feel my mind begin to race. Who is here? What do they want? Why is my mother so pale? "Go right in," says the Capitol man, who has followed me
down the hallway. I twist the polished brass knob and step inside. My nose registers the conflicting scents of roses and blood. A small, white-haired man who seems vaguely familiar is reading a book. He holds up a finger as if to say, "Give me a moment." Then he turns and my heart skips a beat. I'm staring into the snakelike

eyes of President Snow. In my mind, President Snow should be viewed in front of marble pillars hung with oversized flags. It's jarring to see him surrounded by the ordinary objects in the room. Like taking the lid off a pot and finding a fanged viper instead of stew. What could he be doing here? My mind rushes back to the opening days of other Victory Tours. I remember seeing the winning tributes with their mentors and stylists. Even some high government officials have made appearances occasionally. But I have

never seen President Snow. He attends celebrations in the Capitol. Period. If he's made the journey all the way from his city, it can only mean one thing. I'm in serious trouble. And if I am, so is my family. A shiver goes through me when I think of the proximity of my mother and sister to this man who despises me. Will always despise me. Because I outsmarted his sadistic Hunger Games, made the Capitol look foolish, and consequently undermined his control. All I was doing was trying to keep Peeta and myself alive. Any act of rebellion was purely coincidental. But when the Capitol decrees that only one tribute can live and you have the audacity to challenge it, I guess that's a rebellion in itself. My only defense was pretending that I was driven insane by a passionate love for Peeta. So we were both allowed to live. To be crowned victors. To go home and celebrate and wave good-bye to the cameras and be left alone. Until now.
Perhaps it is the newness of the house or the shock of seeing him or the mutual understanding that he could have me killed in a second that makes me feel like the intruder. As if this is his home and I'm the uninvited party. So I don't welcome him or offer him a chair. I don't say anything. In fact, I treat him as if he's a real snake, the venomous kind. I stand motionless, my eyes locked on him, considering plans of retreat. "I think we'll make this whole situation a lot simpler by agreeing not to lie to each other," he says. "What do you think?" I think my tongue has frozen and speech will be impossible, so I surprise myself by answering back in a steady voice, "Yes, I think that would save time." President Snow smiles and I notice his lips for the first time. I'm expecting snake lips, which is to say none. But his are overly full, the skin stretched too tight. I have to wonder if his mouth has been altered to make him more appealing. If so, it

was a waste of time and money, because he's not appealing at all. "My advisors were concerned you would be difficult, but you're not planning on being difficult, are you?" he asks. "No," I answer. "That's what I told them. I said any girl who goes to such lengths to preserve her life isn't going to be interested in throwing it away with both hands. And then there's her family to think of. Her mother, her sister, and all those ... cousins." By the way he lingers on the word "cousins," I can tell he knows that Gale and I don't share a family tree.

Well, it's all on the table now. Maybe that's better. I don't do well with ambiguous threats. I'd much rather know the score. "Let's sit." President Snow takes a seat at the large desk of polished wood where Prim does her homework and my mother her budgets. Like our home, this is a place that he has no right, but ultimately every right, to occupy. I sit in front of the desk on one of the carved, straight-backed chairs. It's made for someone taller than I am, so only my toes rest on the ground. "I have a problem, Miss Everdeen," says President Snow. "A problem that began the moment you pulled out those poisonous berries in the arena." That was the moment when I guessed that if the Gamemakers had to choose between watching Peeta and me commit suicide--which would mean having no victor-- and letting us both live, they would take the latter. "If the Head Gamemaker, Seneca Crane, had had any brains, he'd have blown you to dust right then. But he had an unfortunate sentimental streak. So here you are. Can you guess where he is?" he asks. I nod because, by the way he says it, it's clear that Seneca Crane has been executed. The smell of roses and blood has grown stronger now that only a desk separates us.

There's a rose in President Snow's lapel, which at least suggests a source of the flower perfume, but it must be genetically enhanced, because no real rose reeks like that. As for the blood ... I don't know. "After that, there was nothing to do but let you play out your little scenario. And you were pretty good, too, with the love-crazed schoolgirl bit. The people in the Capitol were quite convinced. Unfortunately, not everyone in the districts fell for your act," he says. My face must register at least a flicker of bewilderment, because he addresses it. "This, of course, you don't know. You have no access to information about the mood in other districts. In several of them, however, people viewed your little trick with the berries as an act of defiance, not an act of love. And if a girl from District Twelve of all places can defy the Capitol and walk away unharmed, what is to stop them from doing the same?" he says. "What is to
prevent, say, an uprising?" It takes a moment for his last sentence to sink in. Then the full weight of it hits me. "There have been uprisings?" I ask, both chilled and somewhat elated by the possibility. "Not yet. But they'll follow if the course of things doesn't change. And uprisings have been known to lead to revolution." President Snow rubs a spot over his left eyebrow, the very spot where I myself get headaches. "Do you have any idea what that would mean? How many people would die? What conditions those left would have to face? Whatever problems anyone may have with the Capitol, believe me when I say that if it released its grip on the districts for even a short time, the entire system would collapse." I'm taken aback by the directness and even the sincerity of this speech. As if his primary concern is the welfare of the citizens of Panem, when nothing could be further from the truth. I don't know how I dare to say the

next words, but I do. "It must be very fragile, if a handful of berries can bring it down." There's a long pause while he examines me. Then he simply

says, "It is fragile, but not in the way that you suppose." There's a knock at the door, and the Capitol man sticks his head in. "Her mother wants to know if you want tea." "I would. I would like tea," says the president. The door opens wider, and there stands my mother, holding a tray with a china tea set she brought to the Seam when she married. "Set it here, please." He places his book on the corner of the desk and pats the center. My mother sets the tray on the desk. It holds a china teapot and cups, cream and sugar, and a plate of cookies. They are beautifully iced with softly colored flowers. The frosting work can only be Peeta's. "What a welcome sight. You know, it's funny how often people forget
that presidents need to eat, too," President Snow says charmingly. Well, it seems to relax my mother a bit, anyway. "Can I get you anything else? I can cook something more substantial if you're hungry," she offers. "No, this could not be more perfect. Thank you," he says, clearly dismissing her. My mother nods, shoots me a glance, and goes. President Snow pours tea for both of us and fills his with cream and sugar, then takes a long time stirring. I sense he has had his say and is waiting for me to respond. "I didn't mean to start any uprisings," I tell him. "I believe you. It doesn't matter. Your stylist turned out to be prophetic in his wardrobe choice. Katniss Everdeen, the girl who was on fire, you have provided a spark that, left unattended, may grow to an inferno that destroys Panem," he says. "Why don't you just kill me now?" I blurt out. "Publicly?" he asks. "That would only add fuel to the flames." "Arrange an accident, then," I

say. "Who would buy it?" he asks. "Not you, if you were watching." "Then just tell me what you want me to do. I'll do it," I say. "If only it were that simple." He picks up one of the flowered cookies and examines it. "Lovely. Your mother made these?" "Peeta." And for the first time, I find I can't hold his gaze. I reach for my tea but set it back down when I hear the cup rattling against the saucer. To cover I quickly take a cookie. "Peeta. How is the love of your life?" he asks. "Good," I say. "At what point did he realize the exact degree of your indifference?" he asks, dipping his cookie in his tea. "I'm not indifferent," I say. "But perhaps not as taken with the young man as you would have the country believe," he says. "Who says I'm not?" I say. "I do," says the president. "And I wouldn't be here if I were the only person who had doubts. How's the handsome cousin?" "I don't know ... I don't ..." My revulsion at this conversation, at discussing my feelings for
two of the people I care most about with President Snow, chokes me off. "Speak, Miss Everdeen. Him I can easily kill off if we don't come to a happy resolution," he says. "You aren't doing him a favor by disappearing into the woods with him each Sunday." If he knows this, what else does he

know? And how does he know it? Many people could tell him that Gale and I spend our Sundays hunting. Don't we show up at the end of each one loaded down with game? Haven't we for years? The real question is what he thinks goes on in the woods beyond District 12. Surely they haven't been tracking us in there. Or have they? Could we have been followed? That seems impossible. At least by a person. Cameras? That never crossed my mind until this moment. The woods have always been our place of safety, our place beyond the reach of the Capitol, where we're free to say what

we feel, be who we are. At least before the Games. If we've been watched since, what have they seen? Two people hunting, saying treasonous things against the Capitol, yes. But not two people in love, which seems to be President Snow's implication. We are safe on that charge. Unless ... unless ... It only happened once. It was fast and unexpected, but it did happen. After Peeta and I got home from the Games, it was several weeks before I saw Gale alone. First there were the obligatory celebrations. A banquet for the victors that only the most high-ranking people were invited to. A holiday for the whole district with free food and entertainers brought in from the Capitol. Parcel Day, the first of twelve, in which food packages were delivered to every person in the district. That was my favorite. To see all those hungry kids in the Seam running around, waving cans of applesauce, tins of meat, even candy. Back home, too big to
carry, would be bags of grain, cans of oil. To know that once a month for a year they would all receive another parcel. That was one of the few times I actually felt good about winning the Games. So between the ceremonies and events and the reporters documenting my every move as I presided and thanked and kissed Peeta for the audience, I had no privacy at all. After a few weeks, things finally died down. The camera crews and reporters packed up and went home. Peeta and I assumed the cool relationship we've had ever since. My family settled into our house in the Victor's Village. The everyday life of District 12--workers to the mines, kids to school -- resumed its usual pace. I waited until I thought the coast was really clear, and then one Sunday, without telling anyone, I got up hours before dawn and took off for the woods. The weather was still warm enough that I didn't need a jacket. I packed along a bag filled with special

foods, cold chicken and cheese and bakery bread and oranges. Down at my old house, I put on my hunting boots. As usual, the fence was not charged and it was simple to slip into the woods and retrieve my bow and arrows. I went to our place, Gale's and mine, where we had shared breakfast the morning of the reaping that sent me into the Games. I waited at least two hours. I'd begun to think that he'd given up on me in the weeks that had passed. Or that he no longer cared about me. Hated me even. And the idea of losing him forever,

my best friend, the only person I'd ever trusted with my secrets, was so painful I couldn't stand it. Not on top of everything else that had happened. I could feel my eyes tearing up and my throat starting to close the way it does when I get upset. Then I looked up and there he was, ten feet
away, just watching me. Without even thinking, I jumped up and threw my arms around him, making some weird sound that combined laughing, choking, and crying. He was holding me so tightly that I couldn't see his face, but it was a really long time before he let me go and then he didn't have much choice, because I'd gotten this unbelievably loud case of the hiccups and had to get a drink. We did what we always did that day. Ate breakfast. Hunted and fished and gathered. Talked about people in town. But not about us, his new life in the mines, my time in the arena. Just about other things. By the time we were at the hole in the fence that's nearest the Hob, I think I really believed that things could be the same. That we could go on as we always had. I'd given all the game to Gale to trade since we had so much food now. I told him I'd skip the Hob, even though I was looking forward to going there, because my mother and

sister didn't even know I'd gone hunting and they'd be wondering where I was. Then suddenly, as I was suggesting I take over the daily snare run, he took my face in his hands and kissed me. I was completely unprepared. You would think that after all the hours I'd spent with Gale--watching him talk and laugh and frown -- that I would know all there was to know about his lips. But I hadn't imagined how warm they would feel pressed against my own. Or how those hands, which could set the most intricate of snares, could as easily entrap me. I think I made some sort of noise in the back of my throat, and I vaguely remember my fingers, curled tightly closed, resting on his chest. Then he let go and said, "I had to do that. At least once." And he was gone. Despite the fact that the sun was setting and my family would be worried, I sat by a tree next to the fence. I tried to decide how I felt about the kiss, if I had liked it or resented it, but all
I really remembered was the pressure of Gale's lips and the scent of the oranges that still lingered on his skin. It was pointless comparing it with the many kisses I'd exchanged with Peeta. I still hadn't figured out if any of those counted. Finally I went home. That week I managed the snares and dropped off the meat with Hazelle. But I didn't see Gale until Sunday. I had this whole speech worked out, about how I didn't want a boyfriend and never planned on marrying, but I didn't end up using it. Gale acted as if the kiss had never happened. Maybe he was waiting for me to say something. Or kiss him back. Instead I just pretended it had never happened, either. But it had. Gale had shattered some invisible barrier between us and, with it, any hope I had of resuming our old, uncomplicated

friendship. Whatever I pretended, I could never look

at his lips in quite the same way. This all flashes through my head in an instant as President Snow's eyes bore into me on the heels of his threat to kill Gale. How stupid I've been to think the Capitol would just ignore me once I'd returned home! Maybe I didn't know about the potential uprisings. But I knew they were angry with me. Instead of acting with the extreme caution the situation called for, what have I done? From the president's point of view, I've ignored Peeta and flaunted my preference for Gale's company before the whole district. And by doing so made it clear I was, in fact, mocking the Capitol. Now I've endangered Gale and his family and my family and Peeta, too, by my carelessness. "Please don't hurt Gale," I whisper. "He's just my friend. He's been my friend for years. That's all that's between us. Besides, everyone thinks we're cousins now." "I'm only interested in how it affects your dynamic with Peeta, thereby
affecting the mood in the districts," he says. "It will be the same on the tour. I'll be in love with him just as I was," I say.

"Just as you are," corrects President Snow. "Just as I am," I confirm. "Only you'll have to do even better if the uprisings are to be averted," he says. "This tour will be your only chance to turn things around." "I know. I will. I'll convince everyone in the districts that I wasn't defying the Capitol, that I was crazy with love," I say. President Snow rises and dabs his puffy lips with a napkin. "Aim higher in case you fall short." "What do you mean? How can I aim higher?" I ask. "Convince me" he says. He drops the napkin and retrieves his book. I don't watch him as he heads for the door, so I flinch when he whispers in my ear. "By the way, I know about the kiss." Then the door clicks shut behind him. The smell of blood ... it was on his breath. What does he do? I

think. Drink it? I imagine him sipping it from a teacup. Dipping a cookie into the stuff and pulling it out dripping red. Outside the window, a car comes to life, soft and quiet like the purr of a cat, then fades away into the distance. It slips off as it arrived, unnoticed. The room seems to be spinning in slow, lopsided circles, and I wonder if I might black out. I lean forward and clutch the desk with one hand. The other still holds Peeta's beautiful cookie. I think it had a tiger lily on it, but now it's been reduced to crumbs in my fist. I didn't even know I was crushing it, but I guess I had to hold on to something while my world veered out of control. A visit from President Snow. Districts on the verge of uprisings. A direct death threat to Gale, with others to follow. Everyone I love doomed. And who knows who else will pay for my actions? Unless I turn things around on this tour. Quiet the discontent and put the president's mind at rest. And how? By
proving to the country beyond any shadow of a doubt that I love Peeta Mellark. I can't do it, I think. I'm not that good. Peeta's the good one, the likable one. He can make people believe anything. I'm the one who shuts up and sits back and lets him do as much of the talking as possible. But it isn't Peeta who has to prove his devotion. It's me. I hear my mother's light, quick tread in the hall. She can't know, I think. Not about any of this. I reach my hands over the tray and quickly brush the bits of cookie from my palm and fingers. I take a shaky sip of my tea. "Is everything all right, Katniss?" she asks. "It's fine. We never see it on television, but the president always visits the victors before the tour to wish them luck," I say brightly. My mother's face floods with relief. "Oh. I thought there was some kind of trouble." "No, not at all," I say. "The trouble will start when my prep team sees how I've let my eyebrows grow back in." My mother

laughs, and I think about how there was no going back after I took over caring for the family when I was eleven. How I will always have to protect her. "Why don't I start your bath?" she asks. "Great," I say, and I can see how

pleased she is by my response. Since I've been home I've been trying hard to mend my relationship with my mother. Asking her to do things for me instead of brushing aside any offer of help, as I did for years out of anger. Letting her handle all the money I won. Returning her hugs instead of tolerating them. My time in the arena made me realize how I needed to stop punishing her for something she couldn't help, specifically the crushing depression she fell into after my father's death. Because sometimes things happen to people and they're not equipped to deal with them. Like me, for instance. Right now. Besides, there's one
wonderful thing she did when I arrived back in the district. After our families and friends had greeted Peeta and me at the train station, there were a few questions allowed from reporters. Someone asked my mother what she thought of my new boyfriend, and she replied that, while Peeta was the very model of what a young man should be, I wasn't old enough to have any boyfriend at all. She followed this with a pointed look at Peeta. There was a lot of laughter and comments like "Somebody's in trouble" from the press, and Peeta dropped my hand and sidestepped away from me. That didn't last long--there was too much pressure to act otherwise--but it gave us an excuse to be a little more reserved than we'd been in the Capitol. And maybe it can help account for how little I've been seen in Peeta's company since the cameras left. I go upstairs to the bathroom, where a steaming tub awaits. My mother has added a small bag of

dried flowers that perfumes the air. None of us are used to the luxury of turning on a tap and having a limitless supply of hot water at our fingertips. We had only cold at our home in the Seam, and a bath meant boiling the rest over the fire. I undress and lower myself into the silky water--my mother has poured in some kind of oil as well -- and try to get a grip on things. The first question is who to tell, if anyone. Not my mother or Prim, obviously; they'd only become sick with worry. Not Gale. Even if I could get word to him. What would he do with the information, anyway? If he were alone, I might try to persuade him to run away. Certainly he could survive in the woods. But he's not alone and he'd never leave his family. Or me. When I get home I'll have to tell him something about why our Sundays are a thing of the past, but I can't think about that now. Only about my next move. Besides, Gale's already so angry and
frustrated with the Capitol that I sometimes think he's going to arrange his own uprising. The last thing he needs is an incentive. No, I can't tell anyone I'm leaving behind in District 12. There are still three people I might confide in, starting with Cinna, my stylist. But my guess is Cinna might already be at risk, and I don't want to pull him into any more trouble by closer association with me. Then there's Peeta, who will be my partner in this deception, but how do I begin that

conversation? Hey, Peeta, remember how I told you I was kind of faking being in love with you? Well, I really need you to forget about that now and act extra in love with me or the president might kill Gale. I can't do it. Besides, Peeta will perform well whether he knows what's at stake or not. That leaves Haymitch. Drunken, cranky, confrontational

Haymitch, who I just poured a basin of ice water on. As my mentor in the Games it was his duty to keep me alive. I only hope he's still up for the job. I slide down into the water, letting it block out the sounds around me. I wish the tub would expand so I could go swimming, like I used to on hot summer Sundays in the woods with my father. Those days were a special treat. We would leave early in the morning and hike farther into the woods than usual to a small lake he'd found while hunting. I don't even remember learning to swim, I was so young when he taught me. I just remember diving, turning somersaults, and paddling around. The muddy bottom of the lake beneath my toes. The smell of blossoms and greenery. Floating on my back, as I am now, staring at the blue sky while the chatter of the woods was muted by the water. He'd bag the waterfowl that nested around the shore, I'd hunt for eggs in the grasses, and we'd
both dig for katniss roots, the plant for which he named me, in the shallows. At night, when we got home, my mother would pretend not to recognize me because I was so clean. Then she'd cook up an amazing dinner of roasted duck and baked katniss tubers with gravy. I never took Gale to the lake. I could have. It's time-consuming to get there, but the waterfowl are such easy pickings you can make up for lost hunting time. It's a place I've never really wanted to share with anyone, though, a place that belonged only to my father and me. Since the Games, when I've had little to occupy my days, I've gone there a couple of times. The swimming was still nice, but mostly the visits depressed me. Over the course of the last five years, the lake's remarkably unchanged and I'm almost unrecognizable. Even underwater I can hear the sounds of commotion. Honking car horns, shouts of greeting, doors banging shut. It can only mean my

entourage has arrived. I just have time to towel off and slip into a robe before my prep team bursts into the bathroom. There's no question of privacy. When it comes to my body, we have no secrets, these three people and me. "Katniss, your eyebrows!" Venia shrieks right off, and even with the black cloud hanging over me, I have to stifle a laugh. Her aqua hair has been styled so it sticks out in sharp points all over her head, and the gold tattoos that used to be confined above her brows have curled around under her eyes, all contributing to the impression that I've literally shocked her. Octavia comes up and pats Venia's back soothingly, her curvy body looking plumper than usual next to Venia's thin, angular one. "There, there. You can fix those in no time. But

what am I going to do with these nails?" She grabs my hand and pins it flat between her two pea green ones. No, her
skin isn't exactly pea green now. It's more of a light evergreen. The shift in shade is no doubt an attempt to stay abreast of the capricious fashion trends of the Capitol. "Really, Katniss, you could have left me something to work with!" she wails. It's true. I've bitten my nails to stubs in the past couple of months. I thought about trying to break the habit but couldn't think of a good reason I should. "Sorry," I mutter. I hadn't really been spending much time worrying about how it might affect my prep team. Flavius lifts a few strands of my wet, tangled hair. He gives his head a disapproving shake, causing his orange corkscrew curls to bounce around. "Has anyone touched this since you last saw us?" he asks sternly. "Remember, we specifically asked you to leave your hair alone." "Yes!" I say, grateful that I can show I haven't totally taken them for granted. "I mean, no, no one's cut it. I did remember that." No, I didn't. It's more like the

issue never came up. Since I've been home, all I've done is stick it in its usual old braid down my back. This seems to mollify them, and they all kiss me, set me on a chair in my bedroom, and, as usual, start talking nonstop without bothering to notice if I'm listening. While Venia reinvents my eyebrows and Octavia gives me fake nails and Flavius massages goo into my hair, I hear all about the Capitol. What a hit the Games were, how dull things have been since, how no one can wait until Peeta and I visit again at the end of the Victory Tour. After that, it won't be long before the Capitol begins gearing up for the Quarter Quell. "Isn't it thrilling?" "Don't you feel so lucky?" "In your very first year of being a victor, you get to be a mentor in a Quarter Quell!" Their words overlap in a blur of excitement. "Oh, yes," I say neutrally. It's the best I can do. In a normal year, being a mentor to the tributes is the stuff of nightmares. I can't walk
by the school now without wondering what kid I'll have to coach. But to make things even worse, this is the year of the Seventy-fifth Hunger Games, and that means it's also a Quarter Quell. They occur every twenty-five years, marking the anniversary of the districts' defeat with over-the-top celebrations and, for extra fun, some miserable twist for the tributes. I've never been alive for one, of course. But in school I remember hearing that for the second Quarter Quell, the Capitol demanded that twice the number of tributes be provided for the arena. The teachers didn't go into much more detail, which is surprising, because that was the year District 12's very own Haymitch Abernathy won the crown. "Haymitch better be preparing himself for a lot of attention!" squeals Octavia. Haymitch has never mentioned his personal experience in the arena to me. I would never ask. And if I ever saw his Games televised in reruns,

I must've been too young to remember it. But the Capitol won't let him forget it this year. In a way, it's a good thing Peeta and I will both be available as mentors during the Quell, because it's a sure bet that Haymitch will be wasted. After they've exhausted the topic of the Quarter Quell, my prep team, launches into a whole lot of stuff about their incomprehensibly silly lives. Who said what about someone I've never heard of and what sort of shoes they just bought and a long story from Octavia about what a mistake it was to have everyone wear feathers to her birthday party. Soon my brows are stinging, my hair's smooth and silky, and my nails are ready to be painted. Apparently they've been given instruction to prepare only my hands and face, probably because everything else will be covered in the cold weather. Flavius badly wants to use his own trademark purple lipstick on me but resigns himself to a pink as they begin to color my face and nails. I can see by the palette Cinna has assigned that we're going for girlish, not sexy. Good. I'll never convince anyone of anything if I'm trying to be provocative. Haymitch made that very clear when he was coaching me for my interview for the Games. My mother comes in, somewhat shyly, and says that Cinna has asked her to show the preps how she did my hair the day of the reaping. They respond with enthusiasm and then watch, thoroughly engrossed, as she breaks down the process of the elaborate braided hairdo. In the mirror, I can see their earnest faces following her every move, their eagerness when it is their turn to try a step. In fact, all three are so readily respectful and nice to my mother that I feel bad about how I go around feeling so superior to them. Who knows who I would be or what I would talk about if I'd been raised in the Capitol? Maybe my

biggest regret would be having feathered costumes at my birthday party, too. When my hair is done, I find Cinna downstairs in the living room, and just the sight of him makes me feel more hopeful. He looks the same as always, simple clothes, short brown hair, just a hint of gold eyeliner. We embrace, and I can barely keep from spilling out the entire episode with President Snow. But no, I've decided to tell Haymitch first. He'll know best who to burden with it. It's so easy to talk to Cinna, though. Lately we've been speaking a lot on the telephone that came with the house. It's sort of a joke, because almost no one else we know owns one. There's Peeta, but obviously I don't call him. Haymitch tore his out of the wall years ago. My friend Madge, the mayor's daughter, has a telephone in her house, but if we want to talk, we do it in person. At first, the thing barely ever got used. Then Cinna started to call to work on my talent. Every
victor is supposed to have one. Your talent is the activity you take up since you don't have to work either in school or your district's industry. It can be anything, really, anything that they can interview you about. Peeta, it turns out, actually has a talent, which is painting. He's been frosting those cakes and cookies for years in his family's bakery. But now that he's rich, he can afford to smear real paint on canvases. I don't have a talent, unless you count hunting illegally, which they don't. Or maybe singing, which I wouldn't do for the Capitol in a million years. My mother tried to interest me in a variety of suitable alternatives from a list Effie Trinket sent her. Cooking, flower arranging, playing the flute. None of them took, although Prim had a knack for all three. Finally Cinna stepped in and offered to help me develop my passion for designing clothes, which really required development since it was nonexistent. But I

said yes because it meant getting to talk to Cinna, and he promised he'd do all the work. Now he's arranging things around my living room: clothing, fabrics, and

sketchbooks with designs he's drawn. I pick up one of the sketchbooks and examine a dress I supposedly created. "You know, I think I show a lot of promise," I say. "Get dressed, you worthless thing," he says, tossing a bundle of clothes at me. I may have no interest in designing clothes but I do love the ones Cinna makes for me. Like these. Flowing black pants made of a thick, warm material. A comfortable white shirt. A sweater woven from green and blue and gray strands of kitten-soft wool. Laced leather boots that don't pinch my toes. "Did I design my outfit?" I ask. "No, you aspire to design your outfit and be like me, your fashion hero," says Cinna. He hands me a small stack of
cards. "You'll read these off camera while they're filming the clothes. Try to sound like you care." Just then, Effie Trinket arrives in a pumpkin orange wig to remind everyone, "We're on a schedule!" She kisses me on both cheeks while waving in the camera crew, then orders me into position. Effie's the only reason we got anywhere on time in the Capitol, so I try to accommodate her. I start bobbing around like a puppet, holding up outfits and saying meaningless things like "Don't you love it?" The sound team records me reading from my cards in a chirpy voice so they can insert it later, then I'm tossed out of the room so they can film my/Cinna's designs in peace. Prim got out early from school for the event. Now she stands in the kitchen, being interviewed by another crew. She looks lovely in a sky blue frock that brings out her eyes, her blond hair pulled back in a matching ribbon. She's leaning a bit forward on the

toes of her shiny white boots like she's about to take flight, like-- Bam! It's like someone actually hits me in the chest. No one has, of course, but the pain is so real I take a step back. I squeeze my eyes shut and I don't see Prim-- I see Rue, the twelve-year-old girl from District 11 who was my ally in the arena. She could fly, birdlike, from tree to tree, catching on to the slenderest branches. Rue, who I didn't save. Who I let die. I picture her lying on the ground with the spear still wedged in her stomach... . Who else will I fail to save from the Capitol's vengeance? Who else will be dead if I don't satisfy President Snow? I realize Cinna's trying to put a coat on me, so I raise my arms. I feel fur, inside and out, encasing me. It's from no animal I've ever seen. "Ermine," he tells me as I stroke the white sleeve. Leather gloves. A bright red scarf. Something furry covers my ears. "You're bringing earmuffs back in style." I hate earmuffs, I think. They make it
cards. "You'll read these off camera while they're filming the clothes. Try to sound like you care." Just then, Effie Trinket arrives in a pumpkin orange wig to remind everyone, "We're on a schedule!" She kisses me on both cheeks while waving in the camera crew, then orders me into position. Effie's the only reason we got anywhere on time in the Capitol, so I try to accommodate her. I start bobbing around like a puppet, holding up outfits and saying meaningless things like "Don't you love it?" The sound team records me reading from my cards in a chirpy voice so they can insert it later, then I'm tossed out of the room so they can film my/Cinna's designs in peace. Prim got out early from school for the event. Now she stands in the kitchen, being interviewed by another crew. She looks lovely in a sky blue frock that brings out her eyes, her blond hair pulled back in a matching ribbon. She's leaning a bit forward on the

toes of her shiny white boots like she's about to take flight, like-- Bam! It's like someone actually hits me in the chest. No one has, of course, but the pain is so real I take a step back. I squeeze my eyes shut and I don't see Prim-- I see Rue, the twelve-year-old girl from District 11 who was my ally in the arena. She could fly, birdlike, from tree to tree, catching on to the slenderest branches. Rue, who I didn't save. Who I let die. I picture her lying on the ground with the spear still wedged in her stomach... . Who else will I fail to save from the Capitol's vengeance? Who else will be dead if I don't satisfy President Snow? I realize Cinna's trying to put a coat on me, so I raise my arms. I feel fur, inside and out, encasing me. It's from no animal I've ever seen. "Ermine," he tells me as I stroke the white sleeve. Leather gloves. A bright red scarf. Something furry covers my ears. "You're bringing earmuffs back in style." I hate earmuffs, I think. They make it
hard to hear, and since I was blasted deaf in one ear in the arena, I dislike them even more. After I won, the Capitol repaired my ear, but I still find myself testing it. My mother hurries up with something cupped in her hand. "For good luck," she says. It's the pin Madge gave me before I left for the Games. A mockingjay flying in a circle of gold. I

tried to give it to Rue but she wouldn't take it. She said the pin was the reason she'd decided to trust me. Cinna fixes it on the knot in the scarf. Effie Trinket's nearby, clapping her hands. "Attention, everyone! We're about to do the first outdoor shot, where the victors greet each other at the beginning of their marvelous trip. All right, Katniss, big smile, you're very excited, right?" I don't exaggerate when I say she shoves me out the door. For a moment I can't quite see right because of the snow, which is now coming down in

earnest. Then I make out Peeta coming through his front door. In my head I hear President Snow's directive, "Convince me." And I know I must. My face breaks into a huge smile and I start walking in Peeta's direction. Then, as if I can't stand it another second, I start running. He catches me and spins me around and then he slips -- he still isn't entirely in command of his artificial leg--and we fall into the snow, me on top of him, and that's where we have our first kiss in months. It's full of fur and snowflakes and lipstick, but underneath all that, I can feel the steadiness that Peeta brings to everything. And I know I'm not alone. As badly as I have hurt him, he won't expose me in front of the cameras. Won't condemn me with a halfhearted kiss. He's still looking out for me. Just as he did in the arena. Somehow the thought makes me want to cry. Instead I pull him to his feet, tuck my glove through the crook of his arm, and merrily pull him on
our way. The rest of the day is a blur of getting to the station, bidding everyone good-bye, the train pulling out, the old team -- Peeta and me, Effie and Haymitch, Cinna and Portia, Peeta's stylist--dining on an indescribably delicious meal I don't remember. And then I'm swathed in pajamas and a voluminous robe, sitting in my plush compartment, waiting for the others to go to sleep. I know Haymitch will be up for hours. He doesn't like to sleep when it's dark out. When the train seems quiet, I put on my slippers and pad down to his door. I have to knock several times before he answers, scowling, as if he's certain I've brought bad news. "What do you want?" he says, nearly knocking me out with a cloud of wine fumes. "I have to talk to you," I whisper. "Now?" he says. I nod. "This better be good." He waits, but I feel certain every word we utter on a Capitol train is being recorded. "Well?" he barks. The train starts to brake and for a

second I think President Snow is watching me and doesn't approve of my confiding in Haymitch and has decided to go ahead and kill me now. But we're just stopping for fuel. "The train's so stuffy," I say. It's a harmless phrase, but I see Haymitch's eyes narrow in understanding. "I know what you need." He pushes past me and lurches down the hall to a door. When he wrestles it open, a blast of snow hits us. He trips out onto the ground. A Capitol attendant rushes to help, but Haymitch waves her away

good-naturedly as he staggers off. "Just want some fresh air. Only be a minute." "Sorry. He's drunk," I say apologetically. "I'll get him." I hop down and stumble along the track behind him, soaking my slippers with snow, as he leads me beyond the end of the train so we will not be overheard. Then he turns on me. "What?" I tell him
everything. About the president's visit, about Gale, about how we're all going to die if I fail. His face sobers, grows older in the glow of the red tail-lights. "Then you can't fail." "If you could just help me get through this trip--" I begin. "No, Katniss, it's not just this trip," he says. "What do you mean?" I say. "Even if you pull it off, they'll be back in another few months to take us all to the Games. You and Peeta, you'll be mentors now, every year from here on out. And every year they'll revisit the romance and broadcast the details of your private life, and you'll never, ever be able to do anything but live happily ever after with that boy." The full impact of what he's saying hits me. I will never have a life with Gale, even if I want to. I will never be allowed to live alone. I will have to be forever in love with Peeta. The Capitol will insist on it. I'll have a few years maybe, because I'm still only sixteen, to stay with my mother and Prim. And

then ... and then ... "Do you understand what I mean?" he presses me. I nod. He means there's only one future, if I want to keep those I love alive and stay alive myself. I'll have to marry Peeta. We slog back to the train in silence. In the hallway outside my door, Haymitch gives my shoulder a pat and says, "You could do a lot worse, you know." He heads off to his compartment, taking the smell of wine with him. In my room, I remove my sodden slippers, my wet robe and pajamas. There are more in the drawers but I just crawl between the covers of my bed in my underclothes. I stare into the darkness, thinking about my conversation with Haymitch. Everything he said was true about the Capitol's expectations, my future with Peeta, even his last comment. Of course, I could do a lot worse than Peeta. That isn't really the point, though, is it? One of the few freedoms we have in District 12 is the right to marry who we want or not marry at
all. And now even that has been taken away from me. I wonder if President Snow will insist we have children. If we do, they'll have to face the reaping each year. And wouldn't it be something to see the child of not one but two victors chosen for the arena? Victors' children have been in the ring before. It always causes a lot of excitement and generates talk about how the odds are not in that family's favor. But it happens too frequently to just be about odds. Gale's convinced the Capitol does it on purpose, rigs the drawings to add extra drama. Given all the trouble I've caused, I've probably guaranteed any child of mine a spot in the Games. I think of Haymitch, unmarried, no family,

blotting out the world with drink. He could have had his choice of any woman in the district. And he chose solitude. Not solitude-- that sounds too peaceful. More like

solitary confinement. Was it because, having been in the arena, he knew it was better than risking the alternative? I had a taste of that alternative when they called Prim's name on reaping day and I watched her walk to the stage to her death. But as her sister I could take her place, an option forbidden to our mother. My mind searches frantically for a way out. I can't let President Snow condemn me to this. Even if it means taking my own life. Before that, though, I'd try to run away. What would they do if I simply vanished? Disappeared into the woods and never came out? Could I even manage to take everyone I love with me, start a new life deep in the wild? Highly unlikely but not impossible. I shake my head to clear it. This is not the time to be making wild escape plans. I must focus on the Victory Tour. Too many people's fates depend on my giving a good show. Dawn comes before sleep does, and there's Effie rapping on my door. I pull on whatever clothes are at the top of the drawer and drag myself down to the dining car. I don't see what difference it makes when I get up, since this is a travel day, but then it turns out that yesterday's makeover was just to get me to the train station. Today I'll get the works from my prep team. "Why? It's too cold for anything to show," I grumble. "Not in District Eleven," says Effie. District 11. Our first stop. I'd rather start in any other district, since this was Rue's home. But that's not how the Victory Tour works. Usually it kicks off in 12 and then goes in descending district order to 1, followed by the Capitol. The victor's district is skipped and saved for very last. Since 12 puts on the least fabulous celebration -- usually just a dinner for the tributes and a victory rally in the square, where nobody looks like they're having any fun -- it's probably best to get us

out of the way as soon as possible. This year, for the first time since Haymitch won, the final stop on the tour will be 12, and the Capitol will spring for the festivities. I try to enjoy the food like Hazelle said. The kitchen staff clearly wants to please me. They've prepared my favorite, lamb stew with dried plums, among other delicacies. Orange juice and a pot of steaming hot chocolate wait at my place at the table. So I eat a lot, and the meal is beyond reproach, but I can't say I'm enjoying it. I'm also annoyed that no one but Effie and I has shown up. "Where's everybody else?" I ask. "Oh, who knows where Haymitch is," says Effie. I didn't really expect Haymitch, because he's probably just getting to bed. "Cinna was up late working on organizing your garment car. He must have over a hundred outfits for you. Your evening clothes are exquisite. And Peeta's team is probably still asleep." "Doesn't he need prepping?" I ask. "Not the way you
do," Effie replies. What does this mean? It means I get to spend the morning having the hair ripped off my body while Peeta sleeps in. I hadn't thought about it much, but in the arena at least some of the boys got to keep their body hair whereas none of the girls did. I can remember Peeta's now, as I bathed him by the stream. Very blond in the sunlight, once the mud and blood had been washed away. Only his face remained completely smooth. Not one of the boys grew a beard, and many were old enough to. I wonder what they did to them. If I feel ragged, my prep team seems in worse condition, knocking back coffee and sharing brightly colored little pills. As far as I can tell, they never get up before noon unless there's some sort of national emergency, like my leg hair. I was so happy when it grew back in, too. As if it were a sign that things might be returning to normal. I run my fingers along the soft, curly

down on my legs and give myself over to the team. None of them are up to their usual chatter, so I can hear every

strand being yanked from its follicle. I have to soak in a tub full of a thick, unpleasant-smelling solution, while my face and hair are plastered with creams. Two more baths follow in other, less offensive, concoctions. I'm plucked and scoured and massaged and anointed until I'm raw. Flavius tilts up my chin and sighs. "It's a shame Cinna said no alterations on you." "Yes, we could really make you something special," says Octavia. "When she's older," says Venia almost grimly. "Then he'll have to let us." Do what? Blow my lips up like President Snow's? Tattoo my breasts? Dye my skin magenta and implant gems in it? Cut decorative patterns in my face? Give me curved talons? Or cat's whiskers? I saw all these things and more on the people in
the Capitol. Do they really have no idea how freakish they look to the rest of us? The thought of being left to my prep team's fashion whims only adds to the miseries competing for my attention-- my abused body, my lack of sleep, my mandatory marriage, and the terror of being unable to satisfy President Snow's demands. By the time I reach lunch, where Effie, Cinna, Portia, Haymitch, and Peeta have started without me, I'm too weighed down to talk. They're raving about the food and how well they sleep on trains. Everyone's all full of excitement about the tour. Well, everyone but Haymitch. He's nursing a hangover and picking at a muffin. I'm not really hungry, either, maybe because I loaded up on too much rich stuff this morning or maybe because I'm so unhappy. I play around with a bowl of broth, eating only a spoonful or two. I can't even look at Peeta--my designated future husband-- although I know none of this is

his fault. People notice, try to bring me into the conversation, but I just brush them off. At some point, the train stops. Our server reports it will not just be for a fuel stop -- some part has malfunctioned and must be replaced. It will require at least an hour. This sends Effie into a state. She pulls out her schedule and begins to work out how the delay will impact every event for the rest of our lives. Finally I just can't stand to listen to her anymore. "No one cares, Effie!" I snap. Everyone at the table stares at me, even Haymitch, who you'd think would be on my side in this matter since Effie drives him nuts. I'm immediately put on the defensive. "Well, no one does!" I say, and get up and leave the dining car. The train suddenly seems stifling and I'm definitely queasy now. I find the exit door, force it open -- triggering some sort of alarm, which I ignore -- and jump to the ground, expecting to land in snow. But the air's warm and
balmy against my skin. The trees still wear green leaves. How far south have we come in a day? I walk along the track, squinting against the bright sunlight, already regretting my words to Effie. She's hardly to blame for my current predicament. I should go back and apologize. My outburst was the height of bad manners, and manners matter

deeply to her. But my feet continue on along the track, past the end of the train, leaving it behind. An hour's delay. I can walk at least twenty minutes in one direction and make it back with plenty of time to spare. Instead, after a couple hundred yards, I sink to the ground and sit there, looking into the distance. If I had a bow and arrows, would I just keep going? After a while I hear footsteps behind me. It'll be Haymitch, coming to chew me out. It's not like I don't deserve it, but I still don't want to hear it. "I'm not in the

mood for a lecture," I warn the clump of weeds by my shoes. "I'll try to keep it brief." Peeta takes a seat beside me. "I thought you were Haymitch," I say. "No, he's still working on that muffin." I watch as Peeta positions his artificial leg. "Bad day, huh?" "It's nothing," I say. He takes a deep breath. "Look, Katniss, I've been wanting to talk to you about the way I acted on the train. I mean, the last train. The one that brought us home. I knew you had something with Gale. I was jealous of him before I even officially met you. And it wasn't fair to hold you to anything that happened in the Games. I'm sorry." His apology takes me by surprise. It's true that Peeta froze me out after I confessed that my love for him during the Games was something of an act. But I don't hold that against him. In the arena, I'd played that romance angle for all it was worth. There had been times when I didn't honestly know how I felt about him. I still don't, really. "I'm sorry,
too," I say. I'm not sure for what exactly. Maybe because there's a real chance I'm about to destroy him. "There's nothing for you to be sorry about. You were just keeping us alive. But I don't want us to go on like this, ignoring each other in real life and falling into the snow every time there's a camera around. So I thought if I stopped being so, you know, wounded, we could take a shot at just being friends," he says. All my friends are probably going to end up dead, but refusing Peeta wouldn't keep him safe. "Okay," I say. His offer does make me feel better. Less duplicitous somehow. It would be nice if he'd come to me with this earlier, before I knew that President Snow had other plans and just being friends was not an option for us anymore. But either way, I'm glad we're speaking again. "So what's wrong?" he asks. I can't tell him. I pick at the clump of weeds. "Let's start with something more basic. Isn't it strange

that I know you'd risk your life to save mine ... but I don't know what your favorite color is?" he says. A smile creeps onto my lips. "Green. What's yours?" "Orange," he says. "Orange? Like Effie's hair?" I say. "A bit more muted," he says. "More like ... sunset." Sunset. I can see it immediately, the rim of the descending sun, the sky streaked with soft shades of orange. Beautiful. I remember the tiger lily cookie and, now that Peeta is talking to me again, it's all I can do not to recount

the whole story about President Snow. But I know Haymitch wouldn't want me to. I'd better stick to small talk. "You know, everyone's always raving about your paintings. I feel bad I haven't seen them," I say. "Well, I've got a whole train car full." He rises and offers me his hand. "Come on." It's good to feel his fingers entwined with mine again, not for
show but in actual friendship. We walk back to the train hand in hand. At the door, I remember. "I've got to apologize to Effie first." "Don't be afraid to lay it on thick," Peeta tells me. So when we go back to the dining car, where the others are still at lunch, I give Effie an apology that I think is overkill but in her mind probably just manages to compensate for my breach of etiquette. To her credit, Effie accepts graciously. She says it's clear I'm under a lot of pressure. And her comments about the necessity of someone attending to the schedule only last about five minutes. Really, I've gotten off easily. When Effie finishes, Peeta leads me down a few cars to see his paintings. I don't know what I expected. Larger versions of the flower cookies maybe. But this is something entirely different. Peeta has painted the Games. Some you wouldn't get right away, if you hadn't been with him in the arena yourself. Water dripping

through the cracks in our cave. The dry pond bed. A pair of hands, his own, digging for roots. Others any viewer would recognize. The golden horn called the Cornucopia. Clove arranging the knives inside her jacket. One of the mutts, unmistakably the blond, green-eyed one meant to be Glimmer, snarling as it makes its way toward us. And me. I am everywhere. High up in a tree. Beating a shirt against the stones in the stream. Lying unconscious in a pool of blood. And one I can't place -- perhaps this is how I looked when his fever was high--emerging from a silver gray mist that matches my eyes exactly. "What do you think?" he asks. "I hate them," I say. I can almost smell the blood, the dirt, the unnatural breath of the mutt. "All I do is go around trying to forget the arena and you've brought it, back to life. How do you remember these things so exactly?" "I see them every night," he says. I know what he means. Nightmares -- which I
was no stranger to before the Games -- now plague me whenever I sleep. But the old standby, the one of my father being blown to bits in the mines, is rare. Instead I relive versions of what happened in the arena. My worthless attempt to save Rue. Peeta bleeding to death. Glimmer's bloated body disintegrating in my hands. Cato's horrific end with the muttations. These are the most frequent visitors. "Me, too. Does it help? To paint them out?" "I don't know. I think I'm a little less afraid of going to sleep at night, or I tell myself I am," he says. "But they haven't gone anywhere." "Maybe they won't. Haymitch's haven't." Haymitch doesn't say so, but I'm sure this is why he doesn't like to sleep in the dark.

"No. But for me, it's better to wake up with a paintbrush than a knife in my hand," he says. "So you really hate them?"

"Yes. But they're extraordinary. Really," I say. And they are. But I don't want to look at them anymore. "Want to see my talent? Cinna did a great job on it." Peeta laughs. "Later." The train lurches forward, and I can see the land moving past us through the window. "Come on, we're almost to District Eleven. Let's go take a look at it."

We go down to the last car on the train. There are chairs and couches to sit on, but what's wonderful is that the back windows retract into the ceiling so you're riding outside, in the fresh air, and you can see a wide sweep of the landscape. Huge open fields with herds of dairy cattle grazing in them. So unlike our own heavily wooded home. We slow slightly and I think we might be coming in for another stop, when a fence rises up before us. Towering at least thirty-five feet in the air and topped with wicked coils
of barbed wire, it makes ours back in District 12 look childish. My eyes quickly inspect the base, which is lined with enormous metal plates. There would be no burrowing under those, no escaping to hunt. Then I see the watchtowers, placed evenly apart, manned with armed guards, so out of place among the fields of wildflowers around them. "That's something different," says Peeta. Rue did give me the impression that the rules in District 11 were more harshly enforced. But I never imagined something like this. Now the crops begin, stretched out as far as the eye can see. Men, women, and children wearing straw hats to keep off the sun straighten up, turn our way, take a moment to stretch their backs as they watch our train go by. I can see orchards in the distance, and I wonder if that's where Rue would have worked, collecting the fruit from the slimmest branches at the tops of the trees. Small communities of

shacks -- by comparison the houses in the Seam are upscale -- spring up here and there, but they're all deserted. Every hand must be needed for the harvest. On and on it goes. I can't believe the size of District 11. "How many people do you think live here?" Peeta asks. I shake my head. In school they refer to it as a large district, that's all. No actual figures on the population. But those kids we see on camera waiting for the reaping each year, they can't be but a sampling of the ones who actually live here. What do they do? Have preliminary drawings? Pick the winners ahead of time and make sure they're in the crowd? How exactly did Rue end up on that stage with nothing but the wind offering to take her place? I begin to weary of the vastness, the endlessness of this place. When Effie comes to tell us to dress, I don't object. I go to my compartment and let the prep team do my hair and makeup. Cinna comes in with a
pretty orange frock patterned with autumn leaves. I think how much Peeta will like the color. Effie gets Peeta and me together and goes through the day's program one last time. In some districts the victors ride through the city while the residents cheer. But in 11 -- maybe because there's not much of a city to begin with, things being so spread out, or maybe because they don't want to waste so many people while the harvest is on -- the public appearance is confined to the square. It takes place before their Justice Building, a huge marble structure. Once, it must have been a thing of

beauty, but time has taken its toll. Even on television you can see ivy overtaking the crumbling facade, the sag of the roof. The square itself is ringed with run-down storefronts, most of which are abandoned. Wherever the well-to-do live in District 11, it's not here. Our entire public

performance will be staged outside on what Effie refers to as the verandah, the tiled expanse between the front doors and the stairs that's shaded by a roof supported by columns. Peeta and I will be introduced, the mayor of 11 will read a speech in our honor, and we'll respond with a scripted thank-you provided by the Capitol. If a victor had any special allies among the dead tributes, it is considered good form to add a few personal comments as well. I should say something about Rue, and Thresh, too, really, but every time I tried to write it at home, I ended up with a blank paper staring me in the face: It's hard for me to talk about them without getting emotional. Fortunately, Peeta has a little something worked up, and with some slight alterations, it can count for both of us. At the end of the ceremony, we'll be presented with some sort of plaque, and then we can withdraw to the Justice Building, where a special dinner will
be served. As the train is pulling into the District 11 station, Cinna puts the finishing touches on my outfit, switching my orange hairband for one of metallic gold and securing the mockingjay pin I wore in the arena to my dress. There's no welcoming, committee on the platform, just a squad of eight Peacekeepers who direct us into the back of an armored truck. Effie sniffs as the door clanks closed behind us. "Really, you'd think we were all criminals," she says. Not all of us, Effie. Just me, I think. The truck lets us out at the back of the Justice Building. We're hurried inside. I can smell an excellent meal being prepared, but it doesn't block out the odors of mildew and rot. They've left us no time to look around. As. we make a beeline for the front entrance, I can hear the anthem beginning outside in the square. Someone clips a microphone on me. Peeta takes my left hand. The mayor's introducing us as the massive doors open with a

groan. "Big smiles!" Effie says, and gives us a nudge. Our feet start moving forward. This is it. This is where I have to convince everybody how in love I am with Peeta, I think. The solemn ceremony is pretty tightly mapped out, so I'm not sure how to do it. It's not a time for kissing, but maybe I can work one in. There's loud applause, but none of the other responses we got in the Capitol, the cheers and whoops and whistles. We walk across the shaded verandah until the roof runs out and we're standing at the top of a big flight of marble stairs in the glaring sun. As my eyes adjust, I see the buildings on the square have been hung with banners that help cover up their neglected state. It's packed with people, but again, just a fraction of the number who live here. As usual, a

special platform has been constructed at the bottom of
the stage for the families of the dead tributes. On Thresh's side, there's only an old woman with a hunched back and a tall, muscular girl I'm guessing is his sister. On Rue's ... I'm not prepared for Rue's family. Her parents, whose faces are still fresh with sorrow. Her five younger siblings, who resemble her so closely. The slight builds, the luminous brown eyes. They form a flock of small dark birds. The applause dies out and the mayor gives the speech in our honor. Two little girls come up with tremendous bouquets of flowers. Peeta does his part of the scripted reply and then I find my lips moving to conclude it. Fortunately my mother and Prim have drilled me so I can do it in my sleep. Peeta had his personal comments written on a card, but he doesn't pull it out. Instead he speaks in his simple, winning style about Thresh and Rue making it to the final eight, about how they both kept me alive--thereby keeping him alive--and

about how this is a debt we can never repay. And then he hesitates before adding something that wasn't written on the card. Maybe because he thought Effie might make him remove it. "It can in no way replace your losses, but as a token of our thanks we'd like for each of the tributes' families from District Eleven to receive one month of our winnings every year for the duration of our lives." The crowd can't help but respond with gasps and murmurs. There is no precedent for what Peeta has done. I don't even know if it's legal. He probably doesn't know, either, so he didn't ask in case it isn't. As for the families, they just stare at us in shock. Their lives were changed forever when Thresh and Rue were lost, but this gift will change them again. A month of tribute winnings can easily provide for a family for a year. As long as we live, they will not hunger. I look at Peeta and he gives me a sad smile. I hear Haymitch's voice. "You could do a lot
worse." At this moment, it's impossible to imagine how I could do any better. The gift ... it is perfect. So when I rise up on tiptoe to kiss him, it doesn't seem forced at all. The mayor steps forward and presents us each with a plaque that's so large I have to put down my bouquet to hold it. The ceremony's about to end when I notice one of Rue's sisters staring at me. She must be about nine and is almost an exact replica of Rue, down to the way she stands with her arms slightly extended. Despite the good news about the winnings, she's not happy. In fact, her look is reproachful. Is it because I didn't save Rue? No. It's because I still haven't thanked her, I think. A wave of shame rushes through me. The girl is right. How can I stand here, passive and mute, leaving all the words to Peeta? If she had won, Rue would never have let my death go unsung. I remember how I took care in the arena to cover her with flowers, to make sure her loss did not go

unnoticed. But that gesture will mean nothing if I don't

support it now. "Wait!" I stumble forward, pressing the plaque to my chest. My allotted time for speaking has come and gone, but I must say something. I owe too much. And even if I had pledged all my winnings to the families, it would not excuse my silence today. "Wait, please." I don't know how to start, but once I do, the words rush from my lips as if they've been forming in the back of my mind for a long time. "I want to give my thanks to the tributes of District Eleven," I say. I look at the pair of women on Thresh's side. "I only ever spoke to Thresh one time. Just long enough for him to spare my life. I didn't know him, but I always respected him. For his power. For his refusal to play the Games on anyone's terms but his own. The Careers wanted him to team up with them from the beginning, but he wouldn't do it. I respected
him for that." For the first time the old hunched woman -- is she Thresh's grandmother? -- raises her head and the trace of a smile plays on her lips. The crowd has fallen silent now, so silent that I wonder how they manage it. They must all be holding their breath. I turn to Rue's family. "But I feel as if I did know Rue, and she'll always be with me. Everything beautiful brings her to mind. I see her in the yellow flowers that grow in the Meadow by my house. I see her in the mockingjays that sing in the trees. But most of all, I see her in my sister, Prim." My voice is undependable, but I am almost finished. "Thank you for your children." I raise my chin to address the crowd. "And thank you all for the bread." I stand there, feeling broken and small, thousands of eyes trained on me. There's a long pause. Then, from somewhere in the crowd, someone whistles Rue's four- note mocking-jay tune. The one that signaled the end of the workday in the

orchards. The one that meant safety in the arena. By the end of the tune, I have found the whistler, a wizened old man in a faded red shirt and overalls. His eyes meet mine. What happens next is not an accident. It is too well executed to be spontaneous, because it happens in complete unison. Every person in the crowd presses the three middle fingers of their left hand against their lips and extends them to me. It's our sign from District 12, the last good-bye I gave Rue in the arena. If I hadn't spoken to President Snow, this gesture might move me to tears. But with his recent orders to calm the districts fresh in my ears, it fills me with dread. What will he think of this very public salute to the girl who defied the Capitol? The full impact of what I've done hits me. It was not intentional--I only meant to express my thanks -- but I have elicited something dangerous. An act of dissent from the people of District 11. This is exactly the kind of thing I am
supposed to be defusing! I try to think of something to say to undermine what has just happened, to negate it, but I can hear the slight burst of static indicating my microphone has been cut off and

the mayor has taken over. Peeta and I acknowledge a final round of applause. He leads me back toward the doors, unaware that anything has gone wrong. I feel funny and have to stop for a moment. Little bits of bright sunshine dance before my eyes. "Are you all right?" Peeta asks. "Just dizzy. The sun was so bright," I say. I see his bouquet. "I forgot my flowers," I mumble. "I'll get them," he says. "I can," I answer. We would be safe inside the Justice Building by now, if I hadn't stopped, if I hadn't left my flowers. Instead, from the deep shade of the verandah, we see the whole thing. A pair of Peacekeepers dragging the old man who whistled to the top

of the steps. Forcing him to his knees before the crowd. And putting a bullet through his head. The man has only just crumpled to the ground when a wall of white Peacekeeper uniforms blocks our view. Several of the soldiers have automatic weapons held lengthwise as they push us back toward the door. "We're going!" says Peeta, shoving the Peacekeeper who's pressing on me. "We get it, all right? Come on, Katniss." His arm encircles me and guides me back into the Justice Building. The Peacekeepers follow a pace or two behind us. The moment we're inside, the doors slam shut and we hear the Peacekeepers' boots moving back toward the crowd. Haymitch, Effie, Portia, and Cinna wait under a static-filled screen that's mounted on the wall, their faces tight with anxiety. "What happened?" Effie hurries over. "We lost the feed just after Katniss's beautiful speech, and then Haymitch said he thought he heard a gun fire, and I said it was
ridiculous, but who knows? There are lunatics everywhere!" "Nothing happened, Effie. An old truck backfired," says Peeta evenly. Two more shots. The door doesn't muffle their sound much. Who was that? Thresh's grandmother? One of Rue's little sisters?

"Both of you. With me," says Haymitch. Peeta and I follow him, leaving the others behind. The Peacekeepers who are stationed around the Justice Building take little interest in our movements now that we are safely inside. We ascend a magnificent curved marble staircase. At the top, there's a long hall with worn carpet on the floor. Double doors stand open, welcoming us into the first room we encounter. The ceiling must be twenty feet high. Designs of fruit and flowers are carved into the molding and small, fat children with wings look down at us from every angle. Vases of blossoms

give off a cloying scent that makes my eyes itch. Our evening clothes hang on racks against the wall. This room has been prepared for our use, but we're barely there long enough to drop off our gifts. Then Haymitch yanks the microphones from our chests, stuffs them beneath a couch cushion, and waves us on. As far as I know, Haymitch has only been here once, when he was on his Victory Tour decades ago. But he must have a remarkable memory or reliable instincts, because he leads us up through a maze of twisting staircases and increasingly narrow halls. At times he has to stop and force a door. By the protesting squeak of the hinges you can tell it's been a long time since it was opened. Eventually we climb a ladder to a trapdoor. When Haymitch pushes it aside, we find ourselves in the dome of the Justice Building. It's a huge place filled with broken furniture, piles of books and ledgers, and rusty weapons. The coat of dust
blanketing everything is so thick it's clear it hasn't been disturbed for years. Light struggles to filter in through four grimy square windows set in the sides of the dome. Haymitch kicks the trapdoor shut and turns on us. "What happened?" he asks. Peeta relates all that occurred in the square. The whistle, the salute, our hesitation on the verandah, the murder of the old man. "What's going on, Haymitch?" "It will be better coming from you," Haymitch says to me. I don't agree. I think it will be a hundred times worse coming from me. But I tell Peeta everything as calmly as I can. About President Snow, the unrest in the districts. I don't even omit the kiss with Gale. I lay out how we are all in jeopardy, how the whole country is in jeopardy because of my trick with the berries. "I was supposed to fix things on this tour. Make everyone who had doubted believe I acted out of love. Calm things down. But obviously, all I've done

today is. get three people killed, and now everyone in the square will be punished." I feel so sick that I have to sit down on a couch, despite the exposed springs and stuffing. "Then I made things worse, too. By giving the money," says Peeta. Suddenly he strikes out at a lamp that sits precariously on a crate and knocks it across the room, where it shatters against the floor. "This has to stop. Right now. This -- this--game you two play, where you tell each other secrets but keep them from me like I'm

too inconsequential or stupid or weak to handle them." "It's not like that, Peeta--" I begin. "It's exactly like that!" he yells at me. "I have people I care about, too, Katniss! Family and friends back in District Twelve who will be just as dead as yours if we don't pull this thing off. So, after all we went through in the arena, don't I even rate the truth from you?"
"You're always so reliably good, Peeta," says Haymitch. "So smart about how you present yourself before the cameras. I didn't want to disrupt that." "Well, you overestimated me. Because I really screwed up today. What do you think is going to happen to Rue's and Thresh's families? Do you think they'll get their share of our winnings? Do you think I gave them a bright future? Because I think they'll be lucky if they survive the day!" Peeta sends something else flying, a statue. I've never seen him like this. "He's right, Haymitch," I say. "We were wrong not to tell him. Even back in the Capitol." "Even in the arena, you two had some sort of system worked out, didn't you?" asks Peeta. His voice is quieter now. "Something I wasn't part of." "No. Not officially. I just could tell what Haymitch wanted me to do by what he sent, or didn't send," I say. "Well, I never had that opportunity. Because he never sent me anything until you

showed up," says Peeta. I haven't thought much about this. How it must have looked from Peeta's perspective when I appeared in the arena having received burn medicine and bread when he, who was at death's door, had gotten nothing. Like Haymitch was keeping me alive at his expense. "Look, boy--" Haymitch begins. "Don't bother, Haymitch. I know you had to choose one of us. And I'd have wanted it to be her. But this is something different. People are dead out there. More will follow unless we're very good. We all know I'm better than Katniss in front of the cameras. No one needs to coach me on what to say. But I have to know what I'm walking into," says Peeta. "From now on, you'll be fully informed," Haymitch promises. "I better be," says Peeta. He doesn't even bother to look at me before he leaves. The dust he disrupted billows up and looks for new places to land. My hair, my eyes, my shiny gold pin. "Did you choose me,
Haymitch?" I ask. "Yeah," he says. "Why? You like him better," I say. "That's true. But remember, until they changed the rules, I could only hope to get one of you out of there alive," he says. "I thought since he was determined to protect you, well, between the three of us, we might be able to bring you home." "Oh" is all I can think to say. "You'll see, the choices you'll have to make. If we survive this," says Haymitch. "You'll learn." Well, I've learned one thing today. This place is not a larger version of District 12. Our fence is unguarded and rarely charged. Our Peacekeepers are unwelcome but less brutal. Our hardships evoke more fatigue than fury. Here in 11, they suffer

more acutely and feel more desperation. President Snow is right. A spark could be enough to set them ablaze. Everything is happening too fast for me to process it. The

warning, the shootings, the recognition that I may have set something of great consequence in motion. The whole thing is so improbable. And it would be one thing if I had planned to stir things up, but given the circumstances ... how on earth did I cause so much trouble? "Come on. We've got a dinner to attend," says Haymitch. I stand in the shower as long as they let me before I have to come out to be readied. The prep team seems oblivious to the events of the day. They're all excited about the dinner. In the districts they're important enough to attend, whereas back in the Capitol they almost never score invitations to prestigious parties. While they try to predict what dishes will be served, I keep seeing the old man's head being blown off. I don't even pay attention to what anyone is doing to me until I'm about to leave and I see myself in the mirror. A pale pink strapless dress brushes my shoes. My hair is pinned back from my
face and falling down my back in a shower of ringlets. Cinna comes up behind me and arranges a shimmering silver wrap around my shoulders. He catches my eye in the mirror. "Like it?" "It's beautiful. As always," I say. "Let's see how it looks with a smile," he says gently. It's his reminder that in a minute, there will be cameras again. I manage to raise the corners of my lips. "There we go." When we all assemble to go down to the dinner, I can see Effie is out of sorts. Surely, Haymitch hasn't told her about what happened in the square. I wouldn't be surprised if Cinna and Portia know, but there seems to be an unspoken agreement to leave Effie out of the bad-news loop. It doesn't take long to hear about the problem, though. Effie runs through the evening's schedule, then tosses it aside. "And then, thank goodness, we can all get on that train and get out of here," she says. "Is something wrong, Effie?" asks Cinna. "I don't like the way we've been

treated. Being stuffed into trucks and barred from the platform. And then, about an hour ago, I decided to look around the Justice Building. I'm something of an expert in architectural design, you know," she says. "Oh, yes, I've heard that," says Portia before the pause gets too long. "So, I was just having a peek around because district ruins are going to be all the rage this year, when two Peacemakers showed up and ordered me back to our quarters. One of them actually poked me with her gun!" says Effie. I can't help thinking this is the direct result of Haymitch, Peeta, and me disappearing earlier in the day. It's a little reassuring, actually, to think that Haymitch might have been right. That no one would have been monitoring the dusty dome where we talked. Although I bet they are now. Effie looks so distressed that I spontaneously give her a hug. "That's awful, Effie.Maybe we shouldn't go to the dinner at all. At least until they've apologized." I know she'll never agree to this, but she brightens considerably at the suggestion, at the validation of her complaint. "No, I'll manage. It's part of my job to weather the ups and downs. And we can't let you two miss your dinner," she says. "But thank you for the offer, Katniss." Effie arranges us in formation for our entrance. First the prep teams, then her, the stylists, Haymitch. Peeta and I, of course, bring up the rear. Somewhere below, musicians begin to play. As the first wave of our little procession begins down the steps, Peeta and I join hands. "Haymitch says I was wrong to yell at you. You were only operating under his instructions," says Peeta. "And it isn't as if I haven't kept things from you in the past." I remember the shock of hearing Peeta confess his love for me in front of all of Panem. Haymitch had known about that and not told me.

"I think I broke a few things myself after that interview." "Just an urn," he says. "And your hands. There's no point to it anymore, though, is there? Not being straight with each other?" I say. "No point," says Peeta. We stand at the top of the stairs, giving Haymitch a fifteen-step lead as Effie directed. "Was that really the only time you kissed Gale?" I'm so startled I answer. "Yes." With all that has happened today, has that question actually been preying on him? "That's fifteen. Let's do it," he says. A light hits us, and I put on the most dazzling smile I can. We descend the steps and are sucked into what becomes an indistinguishable round of dinners, ceremonies, and train rides. Each day it's the same. Wake up. Get dressed. Ride through cheering crowds. Listen to a speech in our honor. Give a thank-you speech in return, but only the one the Capitol gave us, never any personal additions now. Sometimes a brief tour: a
glimpse of the sea in one district, towering forests in another, ugly factories, fields of wheat, stinking refineries. Dress in evening clothes. Attend dinner. Train. During ceremonies, we are solemn and respectful but always linked together, by our hands, our arms. At dinners, we are borderline delirious in our love for each other. We kiss, we dance, we get caught trying to sneak away to be alone. On the train, we are quietly miserable as we try to assess what effect we might be having. Even without our personal speeches to trigger dissent-- needless to say the ones we gave in District 11 were edited out before the event was broadcast--you can feel something in the air, the rolling boil of a pot about to run over. Not everywhere. Some crowds have the weary-cattle feel that I know District 12 usually projects at the victors' ceremonies. But in others -- particularly 8, 4, and 3 -- there is genuine elation in the faces

of the people at the sight of us, and under the elation, fury. When they chant my name, it is more of a cry for vengeance than a cheer. When

the Peacekeepers move in to quiet an unruly crowd, it presses back instead of retreating. And I know that there's nothing I could ever do to change this. No show of love, however believable, will turn this tide. If my holding out those berries was an act of temporary insanity, then these people will embrace insanity, too. Cinna begins to take in my clothes around the waist. The prep team frets over the circles under my eyes. Effie starts giving me pills to sleep, but they don't work. Not well enough. I drift off only to be roused by nightmares that have increased in number and intensity. Peeta, who spends much of the night roaming the train, hears me screaming as I struggle to break out of the haze of drugs that merely prolong the horrible dreams. He manages to wake me and calm me down. Then he climbs into bed to hold me until I fall back to sleep. After that, I refuse the pills. But every night I let him into my bed. We manage the darkness as we did in the arena, wrapped in each other's arms, guarding against dangers that can descend at any moment. Nothing else happens, but our arrangement quickly becomes a subject of gossip on the train. When Effie brings it up to me, I think, Good. Maybe it will get back to President Snow. I tell her we'll make an effort to be more discreet, but we don't. The back-to-back appearances in 2 and 1 are their own special kind of awful. Cato and Clove, the tributes from District 2, might have both made it home if Peeta and I hadn't. I personally killed the girl, Glimmer, and the boy from District 1. As I try to avoid looking at his

family, I learn that his name was Marvel. How did I never know that? I suppose that before the Games I didn't pay attention, and afterward I didn't want to know. By the time we reach the Capitol, we are desperate. We make endless appearances to adoring crowds. There is no danger of an uprising here among the privileged, among those whose names are never placed in the reaping balls, whose children never die for the supposed crimes committed generations ago. We don't need to convince anybody in the Capitol of our love but hold to the slim hope that we can still reach some of those we failed to convince in the districts. Whatever we do seems too little, too late. Back in our old quarters in the Training Center, I'm the one who suggests the public marriage proposal. Peeta agrees to do it but then disappears to his room for a long time. Haymitch tells me to leave him alone. "I thought he wanted it, anyway," I say. "Not
like this," Haymitch says. "He wanted it to be real." I go back to my room and lie under the covers, trying not to think of Gale and thinking of nothing else. That night, on the stage before the Training Center, we bubble our way through a list of questions. Caesar Flickerman, in his twinkling midnight blue suit, his hair, eyelids, and lips still dyed powder blue, flawlessly guides us through the interview. When he asks us about the future, Peeta gets down on one knee, pours out his heart, and begs me to marry him. I, of course, accept. Caesar is beside himself, the Capitol audience is hysterical, shots of crowds around Panem show a country besotted with happiness. President Snow himself makes a surprise visit to congratulate us. He clasps Peeta's hand and gives him an approving slap on the shoulder. He embraces me, enfolding me in the smell of blood and roses, and plants a puffy kiss on my cheek. When he pulls back, his fingers

digging into my arms, his face smiling into mine, I dare to raise my eyebrows. They ask what my lips can't. Did I do it? Was it enough? Was giving everything over to

you, keeping up the game, promising to marry Peeta enough? In answer, he gives an almost imperceptible shake of his head. In that one slight motion, I see the end of hope, the beginning of the destruction of everything I hold dear in the world. I can't guess what form my punishment will take, how wide the net will be cast, but when it is finished, there will most likely be nothing left. So you would think that at this moment, I would be in utter despair. Here's what's strange. The main thing I feel is a sense of relief. That I can give up this game. That the question of whether I can succeed in this venture has been answered, even if that answer is a resounding no. That if desperate times call for
desperate measures, then I am free to act as desperately as I wish. Only not here, not quite yet. It's essential to get back to District 12, because the main part of any plan will include my mother and sister, Gale and his family. And Peeta, if I can get him to come with us. I add Haymitch to the list. These are the people I must take with me when I escape into the wild. How I will convince them, where we will go in the dead of winter, what it will take to evade capture are unanswered questions. But at least now I know what I must do. So instead of crumpling to the ground and weeping, I find myself standing up straighter and with more confidence than I have in weeks. My smile, while somewhat insane, is not forced. And when President Snow silences the audience and says, "What do you think about us throwing them a wedding right here in the Capitol?" I pull off girl-almost-catatonic-with-joy without a hitch. Caesar

Flickerman asks if the president has a date in mind. "Oh, before we set a date, we better clear it with Katniss's mother," says the president. The audience gives a big laugh and the president puts his arm around me. "Maybe if the whole country puts its mind to it, we can get you married before you're thirty." "You'll probably have to pass a new law," I say with a giggle. "If that's what it takes," says the president with conspiratorial good humor. Oh, the fun we two have together. The party, held in the banquet room of President Snow's mansion, has no equal. The forty-foot ceiling has been transformed into the night sky, and the stars look exactly as they do at home. I suppose they look the same from the Capitol, but who would know? There's always too much light from the city to see the stars here. About halfway between the floor and the ceiling, musicians float on what look like fluffy white clouds, but I can't see what holds
them aloft. Traditional dining tables have been replaced by innumerable stuffed sofas and chairs, some surrounding fireplaces, others beside fragrant flower gardens or ponds filled with exotic fish, so that people can eat and drink and do whatever they please in the utmost comfort. There's a large tiled area in the center of the room that serves as everything from a dance floor, to a stage

for the performers who come and go, to another spot to mingle with the flamboyantly dressed guests. But the real star of the evening is the food. Tables laden with delicacies line the walls. Everything you can think of, and things you have never dreamed of, lie in wait. Whole roasted cows and pigs and goats still turning on spits. Huge platters of fowl stuffed with savory fruits and nuts. Ocean creatures drizzled in sauces or begging to be dipped in spicy concoctions.

Countless cheeses, breads, vegetables, sweets, waterfalls of wine, and streams of spirits that flicker with flames. My appetite has returned with my' desire to fight back. After weeks of feeling too worried to eat, I'm famished. "I want to taste everything in the room," I tell Peeta. I can see him trying to read my expression, to figure out my transformation. Since he doesn't know that President Snow thinks I have failed, he can only assume that I think we have succeeded. Perhaps even that I have some genuine happiness at our engagement. His eyes reflect his puzzlement but only briefly, because we're on camera. "Then you'd better pace yourself," he says. "Okay, no more than one bite of each dish," I say. My resolve is almost immediately broken at the first table, which has twenty or so soups, when I encounter a creamy pumpkin brew sprinkled with slivered nuts and tiny black seeds. "I could just eat this all night!" I
exclaim. But I don't. I weaken again at a clear green broth that I can only describe as tasting like springtime, and again when I try a frothy pink soup dotted with raspberries. Faces appear, names are exchanged, pictures taken, kisses brushed on cheeks. Apparently my mockingjay pin has spawned a new fashion sensation, because several people come up to show me their accessories. My bird has been replicated on belt buckles, embroidered into silk lapels, even tattooed in intimate places. Everyone wants to wear the winner's token. I can only imagine how nuts that makes President Snow. But what can he do? The Games were such a hit here, where the berries were only a symbol of a desperate girl trying to save her lover. Peeta and I make no effort to find company but are constantly sought out. We are what no one wants to miss at the party. I act delighted, but I have zero interest in these Capitol people. They are only

distractions from the food. Every table presents new temptations, and even on my restricted one-taste-per-dish regimen, I begin filling up quickly. I pick up a small roasted bird, bite into it, and my tongue floods with orange sauce. Delicious. But I make Peeta eat the remainder because I want to keep tasting things, and the idea of throwing away food, as I see so many people doing so casually, is abhorrent to me. After about ten tables I'm stuffed, and we've only sampled a small number of the dishes available. Just then my prep team descends on us. They're nearly incoherent between the alcohol they've consumed and their ecstasy at

being at such a grand affair. "Why aren't you eating?" asks Octavia. "I have been, but I can't hold another bite," I say. They all laugh as if that's the silliest thing they've ever heard. "No one lets that stop them!" says Flavius. They lead
us over to a table that holds tiny stemmed wineglasses filled with clear liquid. "Drink this!" Peeta picks one up to take a sip and they lose it. "Not here!" shrieks Octavia. "You have to do it in there," says Venia, pointing to doors that lead to the toilets. "Or you'll get it all over the floor!" Peeta looks at the glass again and puts it together. "You mean this will make me puke?" My prep team laughs hysterically. "Of course, so you can keep eating," says Octavia. "I've been in there twice already. Everyone does it, or else how would you have any fun at a feast?" I'm speechless, staring at the pretty little glasses and all they imply. Peeta sets his back on the table with such precision you'd think it might detonate. "Come on, Katniss, let's dance." Music filters down from the clouds as he leads me away from the team, the table, and out onto the floor. We know only a few dances at home, the kind that go with fiddle and flute music and require a good deal of space.

But Effie has shown us some that are popular in the Capitol. The music's slow and dreamlike, so Peeta pulls me into his arms and we move in a circle with practically no steps at all. You could do this dance on a pie plate. We're quiet for a while. Then Peeta speaks in a strained voice. "You go along, thinking you can deal with it, thinking maybe they're not so bad, and then you--" He cuts himself off. All I can think of is the emaciated bodies of the children on our kitchen table as my mother prescribes what the parents can't give. More food. Now that we're rich, she'll send some home with them. But often in the old days, there was nothing to give and the child was past saving, anyway. And here in the Capitol they're vomiting for the pleasure of filling their bellies again and again. Not from some illness of body or mind, not from spoiled food. It's what everyone does at a party. Expected. Part of the fun. One day when I dropped by
to give Hazelle the game, Vick was home sick with a bad cough. Being part of Gale's family, the kid has to eat better than ninety percent of the rest of District 12. But he still spent about fifteen minutes talking about how they'd opened a can of corn syrup from Parcel Day and each had a spoonful on bread and were going to maybe have more later in the week. How Hazelle had said he could have a bit in a cup of tea to soothe his cough, but he wouldn't feel right unless the others had some, too. If it's like that at Gale's, what's it like in the other houses? "Peeta, they bring us here to fight to the death for their entertainment," I say. "Really, this is nothing by comparison." "I know. I know that. It's just sometimes I can't stand it anymore. To the point where ... I'm

not sure what I'll do." He pauses, then whispers, "Maybe we were wrong, Katniss." "About what?" I ask. "About

trying to subdue things in the districts," he says. My head turns swiftly from side to side, but no one seems to have heard. The camera crew got sidetracked at a table of shellfish, and the couples dancing around us are either too drunk or too self-involved to notice. "Sorry," he says. He should be. This is no place to be voicing such thoughts. "Save it for home," I tell him.

Just then Portia appears with a large man who looks vaguely familiar. She introduces him as Plutarch Heavensbee, the new Head Gamemaker. Plutarch asks Peeta if he can steal me for a dance. Peeta's recovered his camera face and good-naturedly passes me over, warning the man not to get too attached. I don't want to dance with Plutarch Heavensbee. I don't want to feel his hands, one resting against mine, one on my hip. I'm not used to being touched,
except by Peeta or my family, and I rank Gamemakers somewhere below maggots in terms of creatures I want in contact with my skin. But he seems to sense this and holds me almost at arm's length as we turn on the floor. We chitchat about the party, about the entertainment, about the food, and then he makes a joke about avoiding punch since training. I don't get it, and then I realize he's the man who tripped backward into the punch bowl when I shot an arrow at the Gamemakers during the training session. Well, not really. I was shooting an apple out of their roast pig's mouth. But I made them jump. "Oh, you're one who--" I laugh, remembering him splashing back into the punch bowl. "Yes. And you'll be pleased to know I've never recovered," says Plutarch. I want to point out that twenty-two dead tributes will never recover from the Games he helped create, either. But I only say, "Good. So, you're the Head Gamemaker this

year? That must be a big honor." "Between you and me, there weren't many takers for the job," he says. "So much responsibility as to how the Games turn out." Yeah, the last guy's dead, I think. He must know about Seneca Crane, but he doesn't look the least bit concerned. "Are you planning the Quarter Quell Games already?" I say. "Oh, yes. Well, they've been in the works for years, of course. Arenas aren't built in a day. But the, shall we say, flavor of the Games is being determined now. Believe it or not, I've got a strategy meeting tonight," he says. Plutarch steps back and pulls out a gold watch on a chain from a vest pocket. He flips open the lid, sees the time, and frowns. "I'll have to be going soon." He turns the watch so I can see the face. "It starts at midnight." "That seems late for--" I say, but then something distracts me. Plutarch has run his thumb across the crystal face of the watch and for just a moment an image appears, glowing as if
lit by candlelight. It's another mockingjay. Exactly like the pin on my dress. Only this one disappears. He snaps the watch closed. "That's very pretty," I say. "Oh, it's more than pretty. It's one of a kind," he says. "If anyone asks about me, say I've gone home to bed. The meetings are supposed to be kept secret. But I thought it'd be safe to tell you." "Yes. Your secret's safe with me," I say. As we shake hands, he gives a small bow, a common gesture here in the Capitol. "Well, I'll see you next summer at the Games, Katniss. Best wishes on your engagement, and good luck with your mother." "I'll

need it," I say. Plutarch disappears and I wander through the crowd, looking for Peeta, as strangers congratulate me. On my engagement, on my victory at the Games, on my choice of lipstick. I respond, but really I'm thinking about Plutarch showing off his pretty, one-of-a-kind

watch to me. There was something strange about it. Almost clandestine. But why? Maybe he thinks someone else will steal his idea of putting a disappearing mockingjay on a watch face. Yes, he probably paid a fortune for it and now he can't show it to anyone because he's afraid someone will make a cheap, knockoff version. Only in the Capitol. I find Peeta admiring a table of elaborately decorated cakes. Bakers have come in from the kitchen especially to talk frosting with him, and you can see them tripping over one another to answer his questions. At his request, they assemble an assortment of little cakes for him to take back to District 12, where he can examine their work in quiet. "Effie said we have to be on the train at one. I wonder what time it is," he says, glancing around. "Almost midnight," I reply. I pluck a chocolate flower from a cake with my fingers and nibble on it, so beyond worrying about manners. "Time to
say thank you and farewell!" trills Effie at my elbow. It's one of those moments when I just love her compulsive punctuality. We collect Cinna and Portia, and she escorts us around to say good-bye to important people, then herds us to the door. "Shouldn't we thank President Snow?" asks Peeta. "It's his house." "Oh, he's not a big one for parties. Too busy," says Effie. "I've already arranged for the necessary notes and gifts to be sent to him tomorrow. There you are!" Effie gives a little wave to two Capitol attendants who have an inebriated Haymitch propped up between them. We travel through the streets of the Capitol in a car with darkened windows. Behind us, another car brings the prep teams. The throngs of people celebrating are so thick it's slow going. But Effie has this all down to a science, and at exactly one o'clock we are back on the train and it's pulling out of the station. Haymitch is deposited in his room. Cinna orders tea and we all take seats

around the table while Effie rattles her schedule papers and reminds us we're still on tour. "There's the Harvest Festival in District Twelve to think about. So I suggest we drink our tea and head straight to bed." No one argues. When I open my eyes, it's early afternoon. My head rests on Peeta's arm. I don't remember him coming in last night. I turn, being careful not to disturb him, but he's already awake. "No nightmares," he says. "What?" I ask. "You didn't have any nightmares last night," he says. He's right. For the first time in ages I've slept through the night. "I had a dream, though," I say, thinking back. "I was following a mockingjay through the woods. For a long time. It was Rue, really. I mean, when it sang, it had her voice." "Where did she

take you?" he says, brushing my hair off my forehead. "I don't know. We never arrived," I say. "But I felt happy."
"Well, you slept like you were happy," he says. "Peeta, how come I never know when you're having a nightmare?" I say. "I don't know. I don't think I cry out or thrash around or anything. I just come to, paralyzed with terror," he says. "You should wake me," I say, thinking about how I can interrupt his sleep two or three times on a bad night. About how long it can take to calm me down. "It's not necessary. My nightmares are usually about losing you," he says. "I'm okay once I realize you're here." Ugh. Peeta makes comments like this in such an offhand way, and it's like being hit in the gut. He's only answering my question honestly. He's not pressing me to reply in kind, to make any declaration of love. But I still feel awful, as if I've been using him in some terrible way. Have I? I don't know. I only know that for the first time, I feel immoral about him being here in my bed. Which is ironic since we're officially engaged now.

"Be worse when we're home and I'm sleeping alone again," he says. That's right, we're almost home. The agenda for District 12 includes a dinner at Mayor Undersee's house tonight and a victory rally in the square during the Harvest Festival tomorrow. We always celebrate the Harvest Festival on the final day of the Victory Tour, but usually it means a meal at home or with a few friends if you can afford it. This year it will be a public affair, and since the Capitol will be throwing it, everyone in the whole district will have full bellies. Most of our prepping will take place at the mayor's house, since we're back to being covered in furs for outdoor appearances. We're only at the train station briefly, to smile and wave as we pile into our car. We don't even get to see our families until the dinner tonight. I'm glad it will be at the mayor's house instead of at the Justice Building, where the memorial for my father was held, where they took me after
the reaping for those wrenching goodbyes to my family. The Justice Building is too full of sadness. But I like Mayor Undersee's house, especially now that his daughter, Madge, and I are friends. We always were, in a way. It became official when she came to say good-bye to me before I left for the Games. When she gave me the mockingjay pin for luck. After I got home, we started spending time together. It turns out Madge has plenty of empty hours to fill, too. It was a little awkward at first because we didn't know what to do. Other girls our age, I've heard them talking about boys, or other girls, or clothes. Madge and I aren't gossipy and clothes bore me to tears. But after a few false starts, I realized she was dying to go into the woods, so I've taken her a couple of times and showed her how to shoot. She's trying to teach me the piano, but mostly I like to listen to her play. Sometimes we eat at each other's houses. Madge

likes mine better. Her parents seem nice but I don't think she sees a whole lot of them. Her father has District 12 to run and her mother gets fierce headaches that force her to stay in bed for days. "Maybe you should take her to the Capitol," I said during one of them. We weren't playing the piano that day, because even two floors away the sound caused her mother pain. "They can fix her up, I bet." "Yes. But you don't go to the Capitol unless they invite you," said Madge unhappily. Even the mayor's privileges are limited. When we reach the mayor's house, I only have time to give Madge a quick hug before Effie hustles me off to the third floor to get ready. After I'm prepped and dressed in a full-length silver gown, I've still got an hour to kill before the dinner, so I slip off to find her. Madge's bedroom is on the second floor along with several guest rooms and her father's study. I stick my head in the study to say hello to the mayor
but it's empty. The television's droning on, and I stop to watch shots of Peeta and me at the Capitol party last night. Dancing, eating, kissing. This will be playing in every household in Panem right now. The audience must be sick to death of the star-crossed lovers from District 12. I know I am. I'm leaving the room when a beeping noise catches my attention. I turn back to see the screen of the television go black. Then the words "UPDATE ON DISTRICT 8" start flashing. Instinctively I know this is not for my eyes but something intended only for the mayor. I should go. Quickly. Instead I find myself stepping closer to the television. An announcer I've never seen before appears. It's a woman with graying hair and a hoarse, authoritative voice. She warns that conditions are worsening and a Level 3 alert has been called. Additional forces are being sent into District 8, and all textile production has ceased. They cut away from

the woman to the main square in District 8. I recognize it because I was there only last week. There are still banners with my face waving from the rooftops. Below them, there's a mob scene. The square's packed with screaming people, their faces hidden with rags and homemade masks, throwing bricks. Buildings burn. Peacekeepers shoot into the crowd, killing at random. I've never seen anything like it, but I can only be witnessing one thing. This is what President Snow calls an uprising. A leather bag filled with food and a flask of hot tea. A pair of fur-lined gloves that Cinna left behind. Three twigs, broken from the naked trees, lying in the snow, pointing in the direction I will travel. This is what I leave for Gale at our usual meeting place on the first Sunday after the Harvest Festival. I have continued on through the cold, misty woods, breaking a path that will be unfamiliar to Gale but is simple for my feet to find. It leads to the lake. I no
longer trust that our regular rendezvous spot offers privacy, and I'll need that and more to spill my guts to Gale

today. But will he even come? If he doesn't, I'll have no choice but to risk going to his house in the dead of night. There are things he has to know... things I need him to help me figure out... Once the implications of what I was seeing on Mayor Undersee's television hit me, I made for the door and started down the hall. Just in time, too, because the

mayor came up the steps moments later. I gave him a wave. "Looking for Madge?" he said in a friendly tone. "Yes. I want to show her my dress," I said. "Well, you know where to find her." Just then, another round of beeping came from his study. His face turned grave. "Excuse me," he said. He went into his study and closed the door tightly. I waited in the hall

until I had composed myself. Reminded myself I must act naturally. Then I found Madge in her room, sitting at her dressing table, brushing out her wavy blond hair before a mirror. She was in the same pretty white dress she'd worn on reaping day. She saw my reflection behind her and smiled. "Look at you. Like you came right off the streets of the Capitol." I stepped in closer. My fingers touched the mockingjay. "Even my pin now. Mockingjays are all the rage in the Capitol, thanks to you. Are you sure you don't want it back?" I asked. "Don't be silly, it was a gift," said Madge. She tied back her hair in a festive gold ribbon. "Where did you get it, anyway?" I asked. "It was my aunt's," she said. "But I think it's been in the family a long time." "It's a funny choice, a mockingjay," I said. "I mean, because of what happened in the rebellion. With the jabber-jays backfiring on the Capitol and all." The jabberjays were muttations, genetically
enhanced male birds created by the Capitol as weapons to spy on rebels in the districts. They could remember and repeat long passages of human speech, so they were sent into rebel areas to capture our words and return them to the Capitol. The rebels caught on and turned them against the Capitol by sending them home loaded with lies. When this was discovered, the jabberjays were left to die. In a few years, they became extinct in the wild, but not before they had mated with female mockingbirds, creating an entirely new species. "But mockingjays were never a weapon," said Madge. "They're just songbirds. Right?" "Yeah, I guess so," I said. But it's not true. A mockingbird is just a songbird. A mockingjay is a creature the Capitol never intended to exist. They hadn't counted on the highly controlled jabberjay having the brains to adapt to the wild, to pass on its genetic code, to thrive in a new form. They

hadn't anticipated its will to live. Now, as I trudge through the snow, I see the mockingjays hopping about on branches as they pick up on other birds' melodies, replicate them, and then transform them into something new. As always, they remind me of Rue. I think of the dream I had the last night on the train, where I followed her in mockingjay form. I wish I could have stayed asleep just a bit longer and found out where she was trying to take me. It's a hike to the lake, no question. If he decides to follow me at all, Gale's going to be put out by this excessive use of energy that could be better spent in hunting. He was conspicuously absent from the dinner at the mayor's house, although the rest of his family came.

Hazelle said he was home sick, which was an obvious lie. I couldn't find him at the Harvest Festival, either. Vick
told me he was out hunting. That was probably true. After a couple of hours, I reach an old house near the edge of the lake. Maybe "house" is too big a word for it. It's only one room, about twelve feet square. My father thought that a long time ago there were a lot of buildings -- you can still see some of the foundations -- and people came to them to play and fish in the lake. This house outlasted the others because it's made of concrete. Floor, roof, ceiling. Only one of four glass windows remains, wavy and yellowed by time. There's no plumbing and no electricity, but the fireplace still works and there's a woodpile in the corner that my father and I collected years ago. I start a small fire, counting on the mist to obscure any telltale smoke. While the fire catches, I sweep out the snow that has accumulated under the empty windows, using a twig broom my father made me when I was about eight and I played house here. Then I sit on the tiny

concrete hearth, thawing out by the fire and waiting for Gale. It's a surprisingly short time before he appears. A bow slung over his shoulder, a dead wild turkey he must have encountered along the way hanging from his belt. He stands in the doorway as if considering whether or not to enter. He holds the unopened leather bag of food, the flask, Cinna's gloves. Gifts he will not accept because of his anger at me. I know exactly how he feels. Didn't I do the same thing to my mother? I look in his eyes. His temper can't quite mask the hurt, the sense of betrayal he feels at my engagement to Peeta. This will be my last chance, this meeting today, to not lose Gale forever. I could take hours trying to explain, and even then have him refuse me. Instead I go straight to the heart of my defense. "President Snow personally threatened to have you killed," I say. Gale raises his eyebrows slightly, but there's no real show of fear or astonishment. "Anyone
else?" "Well, he didn't actually give me a copy of the list. But it's a good guess it includes both our families," I say. It's enough to bring him to the fire. He crouches before the hearth and warms himself. "Unless what?" "Unless nothing, now," I say. Obviously this requires more of an explanation, but I have no idea where to start, so I just sit there staring gloomily into the fire. After about a minute of this, Gale breaks the silence. "Well, thanks for the heads-up." I turn to him, ready to snap, but I catch the glint in his eye. I hate myself for smiling. This is not a funny moment, but I guess it's a lot to drop on someone. We're all going to be obliterated no matter what. "I do have a plan, you know." "Yeah, I bet it's a stunner," he says. He tosses the gloves on my lap. "Here. I don't want your fianc 's old gloves." "He's not my fianc . That's just part of the act. And these aren't his gloves. They were Cinna's,"

I say. "Give them back, then," he says. He pulls on the gloves, flexes his fingers, and nods in approval. "At least I'll die in comfort." "That's optimistic. Of course, you don't know what's happened," I say. "Let's have it," he says. I decide to begin with the night Peeta and I were crowned victors of the Hunger Games, and Haymitch warned me of the Capitol's fury. I tell him about the uneasiness that dogged me even once I was back home, President Snow's visit to my house, the murders in District 11, the tension in the crowds, the last-ditch effort of the engagement, the president's indication that it hadn't been enough, my certainty that I'll have to pay. Gale never interrupts. While I talk, he tucks the gloves in his pocket and occupies himself with turning the food in the leather bag into a meal for us. Toasting bread and cheese, coring apples, placing chestnuts in the fire to roast. I watch his hands, his beautiful, capable fingers. Scarred, as mine
were before the Capitol erased all marks from my skin, but strong and deft. Hands that have the power to mine coal but the precision to set a delicate snare. Hands I trust. I pause to take a drink of tea from the flask before I tell him about my homecoming. "Well, you really made a mess of things," he says. "I'm not even done," I tell him. "I've heard enough for the moment. Let's skip ahead to this plan of yours," he says. I take a deep breath. "We run away." "What?" he asks. This has actually caught him off guard. "We take to the woods and make a run for it," I say. His face is impossible to read. Will he laugh at me, dismiss this as foolishness? I rise in agitation, preparing for an argument. "You said yourself you thought that we could do it! That morning of the reaping. You said--" He steps in and I feel myself lifted off the ground. The room spins, and I have to lock my arms around Gale's neck to brace myself. He's laughing, happy. "Hey!" I

protest, but I'm laughing, too. Gale sets me down but doesn't release his hold on me. "Okay, let's run away," he says. "Really? You don't think I'm mad? You'll go with me?" Some of the crushing weight begins to lift as it transfers to Gale's shoulders. "I do think you're mad and I'll still go with you," he says. He means it. Not only means it but welcomes it. "We can do it. I know we can. Let's get out of here and never come back!" "You're sure?" I say. "Because it's going to be hard, with the kids and all. I don't want to get five miles into the woods and have you--" "I'm sure. I'm completely, entirely, one hundred percent sure." He tilts his forehead down to rest against mine and pulls me closer. His skin, his whole being, radiates heat from being so near the fire, and I close my eyes, soaking in his warmth. I breathe in the smell of snow-dampened leather and smoke and apples, the smell of all those wintry days we shared before the Games. I don'try to move away. Why should I, anyway? His voice

drops to a whisper. "I love you." That's why. I never see these things coming. They happen too fast. One second you're proposing an escape plan and the next... you're expected to deal with something like this. I come up with what must be the worst possible response. "I know." It sounds terrible. Like I assume he couldn't help loving me but that I don't feel anything in return. Gale starts to draw away, but I grab hold of him. "I know! And you... you know what you are to me." It's not enough. He breaks my grip. "Gale, I can't think about anyone that way now. All I can think about, every day, every waking minute since they drew Prim's name at the reaping, is how afraid I am. And there doesn't seem to be room for anything else. If we could get somewhere safe, maybe I could be different. I don't know." I

can see him swallowing his disappointment. "So, we'll go. We'll find out." He turns back to the fire, where the chestnuts are beginning to burn. He flips them out onto the hearth. "My mother's going to take some convincing." I guess he's still going, anyway. But the happiness has fled, leaving an all-too-familiar strain in its place. "Mine, too. I'll just have to make her see reason. Take her for a long walk. Make sure she understands we won't survive the alternative." "She'll understand. I watched a lot of the Games with her and Prim. She won't say no to you," says Gale. "I hope not." The temperature in the house seems to have dropped twenty degrees in a matter of seconds. "Haymitch will be the real challenge." "Haymitch?" Gale abandons the chestnuts. "You're not asking him to come with us?" "I have to, Gale. I can't leave him and Peeta because they'd--" His scowl cuts me off. "What?" "I'm sorry. I didn't realize how large our party
was," he snaps at me. "They'd torture them to death, trying to find out where I was," I say. "What about Peeta's family? They'll never come. In fact, they probably couldn't wait to inform on us. Which I'm sure he's smart enough to realize. What if he decides to stay?" he asks. I try to sound indifferent, but my voice cracks. "Then he stays." "You'd leave him behind?" Gale asks. "To save Prim and my mother, yes," I answer. "I mean, no! I'll get him to come." "And me, would you leave me?" Gale's expression is rock hard now. "Just if, for instance, I can't convince my mother to drag three young kids into the wilderness in winter." "Hazelle won't refuse. She'll see sense," I say. "Suppose she doesn't, Katniss. What then?" he demands. "Then you have to force her, Gale. Do you think I'm making this stuff up?" My voice is rising in anger as well. "No. I don't know. Maybe the president's just manipulating you. I mean, he's throwing

your wedding. You saw how the Capitol crowd reacted. I don't think he can

afford to kill you. Or Peeta. How's he going to get out of that one?" says Gale. "Well, with an uprising in District Eight, I doubt he's spending much time choosing my wedding cake!" I shout. The instant the words are out of my mouth I want to reclaim them. Their effect on Gale is immediate--the flush on his cheeks, the brightness of his gray eyes. "There's an uprising in Eight?" he says in a hushed voice. I try to backpedal. To defuse him, as I tried to defuse the districts. "I don't know if it's really an uprising. There's unrest. People in the streets --" I say. Gale grabs my shoulders. "What did you see?" "Nothing! In person. I just heard something." As usual, it's too little, too late. I give up and tell him. "I saw something on the mayor's television. I wasn't supposed to. There was a
crowd, and fires, and the Peacekeepers were gunning people down but they were fighting back. ..." I bite my lip and struggle to continue describing the scene. Instead I say aloud the words that have been eating me up inside. "And it's my fault, Gale. Because of what I did in the arena. If I had just killed myself with those berries, none of this would've happened. Peeta could have come home and lived, and everyone else would have been safe, too." "Safe to do what?" he says in a gentler tone. "Starve? Work like slaves? Send their kids to the reaping? You haven't hurt people--you've given them an opportunity. They just have to be brave enough to take it. There's already been talk in the mines. People who want to fight. Don't you see? It's happening! It's finally happening! If there's an uprising in District Eight, why not here? Why not everywhere? This could be it, the thing we've been--" "Stop it! You don't know what you're saying.

The Peacekeepers outside of Twelve, they're not like Darius, or even Cray! The lives of district people -- they mean less than nothing to them!" I say. "That's why we have to join the fight!" he answers harshly. "No! We have to leave here before they kill us and a lot of other people, too!" I'm yelling again, but I can't understand why he's doing this. Why doesn't he see what's so undeniable? Gale pushes me roughly away from him. "You leave, then. I'd never go in a million years." "You were happy enough to go before. I don't see how an uprising in District Eight does anything but make it more important that we leave. You're just mad about--" No, I can't throw Peeta in his face. "What about your family?" "What about the other families, Katniss? The ones who can't run away? Don't you see? It can't be about just saving us anymore. Not if the rebellion's begun!" Gale shakes his head, not hiding his disgust with me. "You could do so much." He
throws Cinna's gloves at my feet. "I changed my mind. I don't want anything they made in the Capitol." And he's gone. I look down at the gloves. Anything they made in the Capitol? Was that directed at me? Does he think I am now just another product of the

Capitol and therefore something untouchable? The unfairness of it all fills me with rage. But it's mixed up with fear over what kind of crazy thing he might do next. I sink down next to the fire, desperate for comfort, to work out my next move. I calm myself by thinking that rebellions don't happen in a day. Gale can't talk to the miners until tomorrow. If I can get to Hazelle before then, she might straighten him out. But I can't go now. If he's there, he'll lock me out. Maybe tonight, after everyone else is asleep ... Hazelle often works late into the night finishing up laundry. I

could go then, tap at the window, tell her the situation so she'll keep Gale from doing anything foolish. My conversation with President Snow in the study comes back to me. "My advisors were concerned you would be difficult, but you're not planning on being difficult at all, are you?" "No." "That's what I told them. I said any girl who goes to such lengths to preserve her life isn't going to be interested in throwing it away with both hands." I think of how hard Hazelle has worked to keep that family alive. Surely she'll be on my side in this matter. Or won't she? It must be getting on toward noon now and the days are so short. No point in being in the woods after dark if you don't have to. I stamp out the remains of my little fire, clear up the scraps of food, and tuck Cinna's gloves in my belt. I guess I'll hang on to them for a while. In case Gale has a change of heart. I think of the look on his face when he flung them to the ground. How
repelled he was by them, by me ... I trudge through the woods and reach my old house while there's still light. My conversation with Gale was an obvious setback, but I'm still determined to carry on with my plan to escape District 12. I decide to find Peeta next. In a strange way, since he's seen some of what I've seen on the tour, he may be an easier sell than Gale was. I run into him as he's leaving the Victor's Village. "Been hunting?" he asks. You can see he doesn't think it's a good idea. "Not really. Going to town?" I ask. "Yes. I'm supposed to eat dinner with my family," he says. "Well, I can at least walk you in." The road from the Victor's Village to the square gets little use. It's a safe enough place to talk. But I can't seem to get the words out. Proposing it to Gale was such a disaster. I gnaw on my chapped lips. The square gets closer with every step. I may not have an opportunity again soon. I take a deep breath and let the words rush out. "Peeta,

if I asked you to run away from the district with me, would you?" Peeta takes my arm, bringing me to a stop. He doesn't need to check my face to see if I'm serious. "Depends on why you're asking." "President Snow wasn't convinced by me. There's an uprising in District Eight. We have to get out," I say. "By 'we' do you mean just you and me? No. Who else would be going?" he asks. "My family. Yours, if they want to come.

Haymitch, maybe," I say. "What about Gale?" he says. "I don't know. He might have other plans," I say. Peeta shakes his head and gives me a rueful smile. "I bet he does. Sure, Katniss, I'll go." I feel a slight twinge of hope. "You will?" "Yeah. But I don't think for a minute you will," he says. I jerk my arm away. "Then you don't know me. Be ready. It could be any time." I take off walking and he follows a pace or two
behind. "Katniss," Peeta says. I don't slow down. If he thinks it's a bad idea, I don't want to know, because it's the only one I have. "Katniss, hold up." I kick a dirty, frozen chunk of snow off the path and let him catch up. The coal dust makes everything look especially ugly. "I really will go, if you want me to. I just think we better talk it through with Haymitch. Make sure we won't be making things worse for everyone." He raises his head. "What's that?" I lift my chin. I've been so consumed with my own worries, I haven't noticed the strange noise coming from the square. A whistling, the sound of an impact, the intake of breath from a crowd. "Come on," Peeta says, his face suddenly hard. I don't know why. I can't place the sound, even guess at the situation. But it means something bad to him. When we reach the square, it's clear something's happening, but the crowd's too thick to see. Peeta steps up on a crate against the wall of

the sweetshop and offers me a hand while he scans the square. I'm halfway up when he suddenly blocks my way. "Get down. Get out of here!" He's whispering, but his voice is harsh with insistence. "What?" I say, trying to force my way back up. "Go home, Katniss! I'll be there in a minute, I swear!" he says. Whatever it is, it's terrible. I yank away from his hand and begin to push my way through the crowd. People see me, recognize my face, and then look panicked. Hands shove me back. Voices hiss. "Get out of here, girl." "Only make it worse." "What do you want to do? Get him killed?" But at this point, my heart is beating so fast and fierce I hardly hear them. I only know that whatever waits in the middle of the square is meant for me. When I finally break through to the cleared space, I see I am right. And Peeta was right. And those voices were right, too. Gale's wrists are bound to a wooden post. The wild turkey he shot earlier hangs above
him, the nail driven through its neck. His jacket's been cast aside on the ground, his shirt torn away. He slumps unconscious on his knees, held up only by the ropes at his wrists. What used to be his back is a raw, bloody slab of meat. Standing behind him is a man I've never seen, but I recognize his uniform. It's the one designated for our Head Peacekeeper. This isn't old Cray, though. This is a tall, muscular man with sharp creases in his pants. The pieces of the picture do not quite come together until I see his arm raise the whip. "No!" I cry, and spring forward. It's too late to stop the arm

from descending, and I instinctively know I won't have the power to block it. Instead I throw myself directly between the whip and Gale. I've flung out my arms to protect as much of his broken body as possible, so there's nothing to

deflect the lash. I take the full force of it across the left side of my face. The pain is blinding and instantaneous. Jagged flashes of light cross my vision and I fall to my knees. One hand cups my cheek while the other keeps me from tipping over. I can already feel the welt rising up, the swelling closing my eye. The stones beneath me are wet with Gale's blood, the air heavy with its scent. "Stop it! You'll kill him!" I shriek. I get a glimpse of my assailant's face. Hard, with deep lines, a cruel mouth. Gray hair shaved almost to nonexistence, eyes so black they seem all pupils, a long, straight nose reddened by the freezing air. The powerful arm lifts again, his sights set on me. My hand flies to my shoulder, hungry for an arrow, but, of course, my weapons are stashed in the woods. I grit my teeth in anticipation of the next lash. "Hold it!" a voice barks. Haymitch appears and trips over a Peacekeeper lying on the ground. It's Darius. A huge purple
lump pushes through the red hair on his forehead. He's knocked out but still breathing. What happened? Did he try to come to Gale's aid before I got here? Haymitch ignores him and pulls me to my feet roughly. "Oh, excellent." His hand locks under my chin, lifting it. "She's got a photo shoot next week modeling wedding dresses. What am I supposed to tell her stylist?" I see a flicker of recognition in the eyes of the man with the whip. Bundled against the cold, my face free of makeup, my braid tucked carelessly under my coat, it wouldn't be easy to identify me as the victor of the last Hunger Games. Especially with half my face swelling up. But Haymitch has been showing up on television for years, and he'd be difficult to forget. The man rests the whip on his hip. "She interrupted the punishment of a confessed criminal." Everything about this man, his commanding voice, his odd accent, warns of an unknown and dangerous threat. Where

has he come from? District 11? 3? From the Capitol itself? "I don't care if she blew up the blasted Justice Building! Look at her cheek! Think that will be camera ready in a week?" Haymitch snarls. The man's voice is still cold, but I can detect a slight edge of doubt. "That's not my problem." "No? Well, it's about to be, my friend. The first call I make when I get home is to the Capitol," says Haymitch.

"Find out who authorized you to mess up my victor's pretty little face!" "He was poaching. What business is it of hers, anyway?" says the man. "He's her cousin." Peeta's got my other arm now, but gently. "And she's my fianc . So if you want to get to him, expect to go through both of us." Maybe we're it. The only three people in the district who could make a stand like this. Although it's sure to be temporary. There will be repercussions. But at the moment, all I care about is
keeping Gale alive. The new Head Peacekeeper glances over at his backup squad. With relief, I see they're familiar faces, old friends from the Hob. You can tell by their expressions that they're not enjoying the show. One, a woman named Purnia who eats regularly at Greasy Sae's, steps forward stiffly. "I believe, for a first offense, the required number of lashes has been dispensed, sir. Unless your sentence is death, which we would carry out by firing squad." "Is that the standard protocol here?" asks the Head Peacekeeper. "Yes, sir," Purnia says, and several others nod in agreement. I'm sure none of them actually know because, in the Hob, the standard protocol for someone showing up with a wild turkey is for everybody to bid on the drumsticks. "Very well. Get your cousin out of here, then, girl. And if he comes to, remind him that the next time he poaches off the Capitol's land, I'll assemble that firing squad personally." The

Head Peacekeeper wipes his hand along the length of the whip, splattering us with blood. Then he coils it into quick, neat loops and walks off. Most of the other Peacekeepers fall in an awkward formation behind him. A small group stays behind and hoists Darius's body up by the arms and legs. I catch Purnia's eye and mouth the word "Thanks" before she goes. She doesn't respond, but I'm sure she understood. "Gale." I turn, my hands fumbling at the knots binding his wrists. Someone passes forward a knife and Peeta cuts the ropes. Gale collapses to the ground. "Better get him to your mother," says Haymitch. There's no stretcher, but the old woman at the clothing stall sells us the board that serves as her countertop. "Just don't tell where you got it," she says, packing up the rest of her goods quickly. Most of the square has emptied, fear getting the better of compassion. But after what just happened, I can't
blame anyone. By the time we've laid Gale facedown on the board, there's only a handful of people left to carry him. Haymitch, Peeta, and a couple of miners who work on the same crew as Gale lift him up. Leevy, a girl who lives a few houses down from mine in the Seam, takes my arm. My mother kept her little brother alive last year when he caught the measles. "Need help getting back?" Her gray eyes are scared but determined. "No, but can you get Hazelle? Send her over?" I ask. "Yeah," says Leevy, turning on her heel. "Leevy!" I say. "Don't let her bring the kids." "No. I'll stay with them myself,"

she says. "Thanks." I grab Gale's jacket and hurry after the others. "Get some snow on that," Haymitch orders over his shoulder. I scoop up a handful of snow and press it against my cheek, numbing a bit of the pain. My left eye's

tearing heavily now, and in the dimming light it's all I can do to follow the boots in front of me. As we walk I hear Bristel and Thorn, Gale's crewmates, piece together the story of what happened. Gale must've gone to Cray's house, as he's done a hundred times, knowing Cray always pays well for a wild turkey. Instead he found the new Head Peacekeeper, a man they heard someone call Romulus Thread. No one knows what happened to Cray. He was buying white liquor in the Hob just this morning, apparently still in command of the district, but now he's nowhere to be found. Thread put Gale under immediate arrest and, of course, since he was standing there holding a dead turkey, there was little Gale could say in his own defense. Word of his predicament spread quickly. He was brought to the square, forced to plead guilty to his crime, and sentenced to a whipping to be carried out immediately. By the time I showed up, he'd been
lashed at least forty times. He passed out around thirty. "Lucky he only had the turkey on him," says Bristel. "If he'd had his usual haul, would've been much worse." "He told Thread he found it wandering around the Seam. Said it got over the fence and he'd stabbed it with a stick. Still a crime. But if they'd known he'd been in the woods with weapons, they'd have killed him for sure," says Thom. "What about Darius?" Peeta asks. "After about twenty lashes, he stepped in, saying that was enough. Only he didn't do it smart and official, like Purnia did. He grabbed Thread's arm and Thread hit him in the head with the butt of the whip. Nothing good waiting for him," says Bristel. "Doesn't sound like much good for any of us," says Haymitch. Snow begins, thick and wet, making visibility even more difficult. I stumble up the walk to my house behind the others, using my ears more than my eyes to guide me. A golden light colors the snow as the door

opens. My mother, who was no doubt waiting for me after a long day of unexplained absence, takes in the scene. "New Head," Haymitch says, and she gives him a curt nod as if no other explanation is needed. I'm filled with awe, as I always am, as I watch her transform from a woman who calls me to kill a spider to a woman immune to fear. When a sick or dying person is brought to her ... this is the only time I think my mother knows who she is. In moments, the long kitchen table has been cleared, a sterile white cloth spread across it, and Gale hoisted onto it. My mother pours water from a kettle into a basin while ordering Prim to pull a series of her remedies from the medicine cabinet. Dried herbs and tinctures and store-bought bottles. I watch her hands, the long, tapered fingers crumbling this, adding drops of that, into the basin. Soaking acloth in the hot liquid as she gives Prim instructions to prepare a second brew. My mother glances my way. "Did it cut your eye?" "No, it's just swelled shut," I say. "Get more snow on it," she instructs. But I am clearly not a priority. "Can you save him?" I ask my mother. She says nothing as she wrings out the cloth and holds it in the air to cool somewhat. "Don't worry," says Haymitch. "Used to be a lot of whipping before Cray. She's the one we took them to." I can't remember a time before Cray, a time when there was a Head Peacekeeper who used the whip freely. But my mother must have been around my age and still working at the apothecary shop with her parents. Even back then, she must have had healer's hands. Ever so gently, she begins to clean the mutilated flesh on Gale's back. I feel sick to my stomach, useless, the remaining snow dripping from my glove into a puddle on the floor. Peeta puts me in a chair and holds a

cloth filled with fresh snow to my cheek. Haymitch tells Bristel and Thorn to get home, and I see him press coins into their hands before they leave. "Don't know what will happen with your crew," he says. They nod and accept the money. Hazelle arrives, breathless and flushed, fresh snow in her hair. Wordlessly, she sits on a stool next to the table, takes Gale's hand, and holds it against her lips. My mother doesn't acknowledge even her. She's gone into that special zone that includes only herself and the patient and occasionally Prim. The rest of us can wait. Even in her expert hands, it takes a long time to clean the wounds, arrange what shredded skin can be saved, apply a salve and a light bandage. As the blood clears, I can see where every stroke of the lash landed and feel it resonate in the single cut on my face. I multiply my own pain once, twice, forty times and can only hope that Gale remains unconscious. Of course, that's
too much to ask for. As the final bandages are being placed, a moan escapes his lips. Hazelle strokes his hair and whispers something while my mother and Prim go through their meager store of painkillers, the kind usually accessible only to doctors. They are hard to come by, expensive, and always in demand. My mother has to save the strongest for the worst pain, but what is the worst pain? To me, it's always the pain that is present. If I were in charge, those painkillers would be gone in a day because I have so little ability to watch suffering. My mother tries to save them for those who are actually in the process of dying, to ease them out of the world. Since Gale is regaining consciousness, they decide on an herbal concoction he can take by mouth. "That won't be enough," I say. They stare at me. "That won't be enough, I know how it feels. That will barely knock out a headache." "We'll combine it with sleep syrup, Katniss, and he'll manage

it. The herbs are more for the inflammation--" my mother begins calmly. "Just give him the medicine!" I scream at her.

"Give it to him! Who are you, anyway, to decide how much pain he can stand!" Gale begins stirring at my voice, trying to reach me. The movement causes fresh blood to stain his bandages and an agonized sound to come from his mouth. "Take her out," says my mother. Haymitch and Peeta literally carry me from the room while I shout obscenities at her. They pin me down on a bed in one of the extra bedrooms until I stop fighting. While I lie there, sobbing, tears trying to squeeze out of the slit of my eye, I hear Peeta whisper to Haymitch about President Snow, about the uprising in District 8. "She wants us all to run," he says, but if Haymitch has an opinion on this, he doesn't offer it. After a while, my mother comes in and treats my face. Then she
holds my hand, stroking my arm, while Haymitch fills her in on what happened with Gale. "So it's starting again?" she says. "Like before?" "By the looks of it," he answers. "Who'd have thought we'd ever be sorry to see old Cray go?" Cray would have been disliked, anyway, because of the uniform he wore, but it was his habit of luring starving young women into his bed for money that made him an object of loathing in the district. In really bad times, the hungriest would gather at his door at nightfall, vying for the chance to earn a few coins to feed their families by selling their bodies. Had I been older when my father died, I might have been among them. Instead I learned to hunt. I don't know exactly what my mother means by things starting again, but I'm too angry and hurting to ask. It's registered, though, the idea of worse times returning, because when the doorbell rings, I shoot straight out of bed. Who could it be at this hour of the

night? There's only one answer. Peacekeepers. "They can't have him," I say. "Might be you they're after," Haymitch reminds me. "Or you," I say. "Not my house," Haymitch points out. "But I'll get the door." "No, I'll get it," says my mother quietly. We all go, though, following her down the hallway to the insistent ring of the bell. When she opens it, there's not a squad of Peacekeepers but a single, snow-caked figure. Madge. She holds out a small, damp cardboard box to me. "Use these for your friend," she says. I take off the lid of the box, revealing half a dozen vials of clear liquid. "They're my mother's. She said I could take them. Use them, please." She runs back into the storm before we can stop her. "Crazy girl," Haymitch mutters as we follow, my mother into the kitchen. Whatever my mother had given Gale, I was right, it isn't enough. His teeth are gritted and his flesh shines with sweat. My mother fills a syringe with the clear liquid from
one of the vials and shoots it into his arm. Almost immediately, his face begins to relax. "What is that stuff?" asks Peeta. "It's from the Capitol. It's called morphling," my mother answers. "I didn't even know Madge knew Gale," says Peeta. "We used to sell her

strawberries," I say almost angrily. What am I angry about, though? Not that she has brought the medicine, surely. "She must have quite a taste for them," says Haymitch.

That's what nettles me. It's the implication that there's something going on between Gale and Madge. And I don't like it. "She's my friend" is all I say. Now that Gale has drifted away on the painkiller, everyone seems to deflate. Prim makes us each eat some stew and bread. A room is offered to Hazelle, but she has to go home to the other kids. Haymitch

and Peeta are both willing to stay, but my mother sends them home to bed as well. She knows it's pointless to try this with me and leaves me to tend Gale while she and Prim rest. Alone in the kitchen with Gale, I sit on Hazelle's stool, holding his hand. After a while, my fingers find his face. I touch parts of him I have never had cause to touch before. His heavy, dark eyebrows, the curve of his cheek, the line of his nose, the hollow at the base of his neck. I trace the outline of stubble on his jaw and finally work my way to his lips. Soft and full, slightly chapped. His breath warms my chilled skin. Does everyone look younger asleep? Because right now he could be the boy I ran into in the woods years ago, the one who accused me of stealing from his traps. What a pair we were--fatherless, frightened, but fiercely committed, too, to keeping our families alive. Desperate, yet no longer alone after that day, because we'd found each
other. I think of a hundred moments in the woods, lazy afternoons fishing, the day I taught him to swim, that time I twisted my knee and he carried me home. Mutually counting on each other, watching each other's backs, forcing each other to be brave. For the first time, I reverse our positions in my head. I imagine watching Gale volunteering to save Rory in the reaping, having him torn from my life, becoming some strange girl's lover to stay alive, and then coming home with her. Living next to her. Promising to marry her. The hatred I feel for him, for the phantom girl, for everything, is so real and immediate that it chokes me. Gale is mine. I am his. Anything else is unthinkable. Why did it take him being whipped within an inch of his life to see it? Because I'm selfish. I'm a coward. I'm the kind of girl who, when she might actually be of use, would run to stay alive and leave those who couldn't follow to suffer and die. This is

the girl Gale met in the woods today. No wonder I won the Games. No decent person ever does. You saved Peeta, I think weakly. But now I question even that. I knew good and well that my life back in District 12 would be unlivable if I let that boy die. I rest my head forward on the edge of the table, overcome with loathing for myself. Wishing I had died in the arena. Wishing Seneca Crane had blown me to bits the way President Snow said he should have when I held out the berries. The berries. I realize the answer to who I am lies in that handful of poisonous fruit. If I held them out to save Peeta because I knew I would be shunned if I came back without him, then I am despicable. If I held them out because

I loved him, I am still self-centered, although forgivable. But if I held them out to defy the Capitol, I am
someone of worth. The trouble is, I don't know exactly what was going on inside me at that moment. Could it be the people in the districts are right? That it was an act of rebellion, even if it was an unconscious one? Because, deep down, I must know it isn't enough to keep myself, or my family, or my friends alive by running away. Even if I could. It wouldn't fix anything. It wouldn't stop people from being hurt the way Gale was today. Life in District 12 isn't really so different from life in the arena. At some point, you have to stop running and turn around and face whoever wants you dead. The hard thing is finding the courage to do it. Well, it's not hard for Gale. He was born a rebel. I'm the one making an escape plan. "I'm so sorry," I whisper. I lean forward and kiss him. His eyelashes flutter and he looks at me through a haze of opiates. "Hey, Catnip." "Hey, Gale," I say. "Thought you'd be gone by now," he says. My choices are simple. I can die

like quarry in the woods or I can die here beside Gale. "I'm not going anywhere. I'm going to stay right here and cause all kinds of trouble." "Me, too," Gale says. He just manages a smile before the drugs pull him back under. Someone gives my shoulder a shake and I sit up. I've fallen asleep with my face on the table. The white cloth has left creases on my good cheek. The other, the one that took the lash from Thread, throbs painfully. Gale's dead to the world, but his fingers are locked around mine. I smell fresh bread and turn my stiff neck to find Peeta looking down at me with such a sad expression. I get the sense that he's been watching us awhile. "Go on up to bed, Katniss. I'll look after him now," he says. "Peeta. About what I said yesterday, about running--" I begin. "I know," he says. "There's nothing to explain." I see the loaves of bread on the counter in the pale, snowy morning light. The blue shadows under his eyes. I
wonder if he slept at all. Couldn't have been long. I think of his agreeing to go with me yesterday, his stepping up beside me to protect Gale, his willingness to throw his lot in with mine entirely when I give him so little in return. No matter what I do, I'm hurting someone. "Peeta--" "Just go to bed, okay?" he says. I feel my way up the stairs, crawl under the covers, and fall asleep at once. At some point, Clove, the girl from District 2, enters my dreams. She chases me, pins me to the ground, and pulls out a knife to cut my face. It digs deeply into my cheek, opening a wide gash. Then Clove begins to transform, her face elongating into a snout, dark fur sprouting from her skin, her fingernails growing into long claws, but her eyes remain unchanged. She becomes the mutta-tion form of herself, the wolflike creation of the Capitol that terrorized us the last night in the arena. Tossing back her head, she lets out a

long, eerie howl that is picked up by other mutts nearby. Clove begins to lap the blood flowing from my wound, each lick sending a new wave of pain through my face. I give a strangled cry and wake with a start, sweating and shivering at once. Cradling my damaged cheek in my hand, I remind myself that it was not Clove but Thread who gave me this wound. I wish that Peeta were here to hold me, until I remember I'm not supposed to wish, that anymore. I have chosen Gale and the rebellion, and a future with Peeta is the Capitol's design, not mine. The swelling around my eye has gone down and I can open it a bit. I push aside the curtains and see the snowstorm has strengthened to a full-out blizzard. There's nothing but whiteness and the howling wind that sounds remarkably like the muttations. I welcome the blizzard, with its ferocious winds and deep, drifting snow. This may be enough to keep the real wolves,
also known as the Peacekeepers, from my door. A few days to think. To work out a plan. With Gale and Peeta and Haymitch all at hand. This blizzard is a gift. Before I go down to face this new life, though, I take some time making myself acknowledge what it will mean. Less than a day ago, I was prepared to head into the wilderness with my loved ones in midwinter, with the very real possibility of the Capitol pursuing us. A precarious venture at best. But now I am committing to something even more risky. Fighting the Capitol assures their swift retaliation. I must accept that at any moment I can be arrested. There will be a knock on the door, like the one last night, a band of Peacekeepers to haul me away. There might be torture. Mutilation. A bullet through my skull in the town square, if I'm fortunate enough to go that quickly. The Capitol has no end of creative ways to kill people. I imagine these things and I'm terrified, but let's

face it: They've been lurking in the back of my brain, anyway. I've been a tribute in the Games. Been threatened by the president. Taken a lash across my face. I'm already a target. Now comes the harder part. I have to face the fact that my family and friends might share this fate. Prim. I need only to think of Prim and all my resolve disintegrates. It's my job to protect her. I pull the blanket up over my head, and my breathing is so rapid I use up all the oxygen and begin to choke for air. I can't let the Capitol hurt Prim. And then it hits me. They already have. They have killed her father in those wretched mines. They have sat by as she almost starved to death. They have chosen her as a tribute, then made her watch her sister fight to the death in the Games. She has been hurt far worse than I had at the age of twelve. And even that pales in comparison with Rue's life. I shove off the blanket and suck in the cold air that seeps through the
windowpanes. Prim ... Rue ... aren't they the very reason I have to try to fight? Because what has been done to them is so wrong, so beyond justification, so

evil that there is no choice? Because no one has the right to treat them as they have been treated? Yes. This is the thing to remember when fear threatens to swallow me up. What I am about to do, whatever any of us are forced to endure, it is for them. It's too late to help Rue, but maybe not too late for those five little faces that looked up at me from the square in District 11. Not too late for Rory and Vick and Posy. Not too late for Prim. Gale is right. If people have the courage, this could be an opportunity. He's also right that, since I have set it in motion, I could do so much. Although I have no idea what exactly that should be. But deciding not to run away is a crucial first step. I take a shower, and this

morning my brain is not assembling lists of supplies for the wild, but trying to figure out how they organized that uprising in District 8. So many, so clearly acting in defiance of the Capitol. Was it even planned, or something that simply erupted out of years of hatred and resentment? How could we do that here? Would the people of District 12 join in or lock their doors? Yesterday the square emptied so quickly after Gale's whipping. But isn't that because we all feel so impotent and have no idea what to do? We need someone to direct us and reassure us this is possible. And I don't think I'm that person. I may have been a catalyst for rebellion, but a leader should be someone with conviction, and I'm barely a convert myself. Someone with unflinching courage, and I'm still working hard at even finding mine. Someone with clear and persuasive words, and I'm so easily tongue-tied. Words. I think of words and I think of Peeta. How people
embrace everything he says. He could move a crowd to action, I bet, if he chose to. Would find the things to say. But I'm sure the idea has never crossed his mind. Downstairs, I find my mother and Prim tending to a subdued Gale. The medicine must be wearing off, by the look on his face. I brace myself for another fight but try to keep my voice calm. "Can't you give him another shot?" "I will, if it's needed. We thought we'd try the snow coat first," says my mother. She has removed his bandages. You can practically see the heat radiating off his back. She lays a clean cloth across his angry flesh and nods to Prim. Prim comes over, stirring what appears to be a large bowl of snow. But it's tinted a light green and gives off a sweet, clean scent. Snow coat. She carefully begins to ladle the stuff onto the cloth. I can almost hear the sizzle of Gale's tormented skin meeting the snow mixture. His eyes flutter open, perplexed, and then

he lets out a sound of relief. "It's lucky we have snow," says my mother. I think of what it must be like to recover from a whipping in midsummer, with the searing heat and the tepid water from the tap. "What did you do in warm months?" I ask. A crease appears between my mother's eyebrows as she frowns. "Tried to keep the flies away." My

stomach turns at the thought. She fills a handkerchief with the snow-coat mixture and I hold it to the weal on my cheek. Instantly the pain withdraws. It's the coldness of the snow, yes, but whatever mix of herbal juices my mother has added numbs as well. "Oh. That's wonderful. Why didn't you put this on him last night?" "I needed the wound to set first," she says. I don't know what that means exactly, but as long as it works, who am I to question her? She knows what she's doing, my mother. I feel a pang of remorse about yesterday, the awful things I yelled at her as Peeta and Haymitch dragged me from the kitchen. "I'm sorry. About screaming at you yesterday." "I've heard worse," she says. "You've seen how people are, when someone they love is in pain." Someone they love. The words numb my tongue as if it's been packed in snow coat. Of course, I love Gale. But what kind of love does she mean? What do I mean when I say I love Gale? I don't know. I did kiss him last night, in a moment when my emotions were running so high. But I'm sure he doesn't remember it. Does he? I hope not. If he does, everything will just get more complicated and I really can't think about kissing when I've got a rebellion to incite. I give my head a little shake to clear it. "Where's Peeta?" I say. "He went home when we heard you stirring. Didn't want to leave his house unattended during the storm," says my mother. "Did he get back all right?" I ask. In a blizzard, you can get

lost in a matter of yards and wander off course into oblivion. "Why don't you give him a call and check?" she says. I go into the study, a room I've pretty much avoided since my meeting with President Snow, and dial Peeta's number. After a few rings he answers. "Hey. I just wanted to make sure you got home," I say. "Katniss, I live three houses away from you," he says. "I know, but with the weather and all," I say. "Well, I'm fine. Thank you for checking." There's a long pause. "How's Gale?" "All right. My mother and Prim are giving him snow coat now," I say. "And your face?" he asks. "I've got some, too," I say. "Have you seen Haymitch today?" "I checked in on him. Dead drunk. But I built up his fire and left him some bread," he says. "I wanted to talk to -- to both of you." I don't dare add more, here on my phone, which is surely tapped. "Probably have to wait until after the weather calms down," he says. "Nothing much will happen before
that, anyway." "No, nothing much," I agree. It takes two days for the storm to blow itself out, leaving us with drifts higher than my head. Another day before the path is cleared from the Victor's Village to the square. During this time I help tend to Gale, apply snow coat to my cheek, try to remember everything I can about the uprising in District 8, in case it will help us. The swelling in my face goes down, leaving me with an itchy, healing wound and a very black eye. But still, the first chance I get, I call Peeta to see if he wants to go into town with me. We rouse Haymitch and drag him along with us. He complains, but not as much as usual. We all know we need to discuss what happened and it can't be anywhere as dangerous as our homes in the Victor's Village. In fact, we wait until the village is well behind us to even speak. I spend the time studying the ten-foot walls of snow piled up on either side of the narrow path that has been

cleared, wondering if they will collapse in on us. Finally Haymitch breaks the

silence. "So we're all heading off into the great unknown, are we?" he asks me. "No," I say. "Not anymore." "Worked through the flaws in that plan, did you, sweetheart?" he asks. "Any new ideas?" "I want to start an uprising," I say. Haymitch just laughs. It's not even a mean laugh, which is more troubling. It shows he can't even take me seriously. "Well, I want a drink. You let me know how that works out for you, though," he says. "Then what's your plan?" I spit back at him. "My plan is to make sure everything is just perfect for your wedding," says Haymitch. "I called and rescheduled the photo shoot without giving too many details." "You don't even have a phone," I say. "Effie had that fixed," he says. "Do you know she asked me if I'd like to give you away? I told her
the sooner the better." "Haymitch." I can hear the pleading creeping into my voice. "Katniss." He mimics my tone. "It won't work." We shut up as a team of men with shovels passes us, headed out to the Victor's Village. Maybe they can do something about those ten-foot walls. And by the time they're out of earshot, the square is too close. We step into it and all come to a stop simultaneously. Nothing much will happen during the blizzard. That's what Peeta and I had agreed. But we couldn't have been more wrong. The square has been transformed. A huge banner with the seal of Panem hangs off the roof of the Justice Building. Peacekeepers, in pristine white uniforms, march on the cleanly swept cobblestones. Along the rooftops, more of them occupy nests of machine guns. Most unnerving is a line of new constructions --an official whipping post, several stockades, and a gallows -- set up in the center of the square.

"Thread's a quick worker," says Haymitch. Some streets away from the square, I see a blaze flare up. None of us has to say it. That can only be the Hob going up in smoke. I think of Greasy Sae, Ripper, all my friends who make their living there. "Haymitch, you don't think everyone was still in---" I can't finish the sentence. "Nah, they're smarter than that. You'd be, too, if you'd been around longer," he says. "Well, I better go see how much rubbing alcohol the apothecary can spare." He trudges off across the square and I look at Peeta. "What's he want that for?" Then I realize the answer. "We can't let him drink it. He'll kill himself, or at the very least go blind. I've got some white liquor put away at home." "Me, too. Maybe that will hold him until Ripper finds a way to be back in business," says Peeta. "I need to check on my family." "I have to go see Hazelle." I'm worried now. I thought she'd be on our doorstep the moment the snow was cleared. But
there's been no sign of her. "I'll go, too. Drop by the bakery on my way home," he says. "Thanks." I'm suddenly very scared at what I might find. The streets are almost deserted, which would not be so unusual at this time of day if people were at the mines, kids

at school. But they're not. I see faces peeking at us out of doorways, through cracks in shutters. An uprising, I think. What an idiot I am. There's an inherent flaw in the plan that both Gale and I were too blind to see. An uprising requires breaking the law, thwarting authority. We've done that our whole lives, or our families have. Poaching, trading on the black market, mocking the Capitol in the woods. But for most people in District 12, a trip to buy something at the Hob would be too risky. And I expect them to assemble in the square with bricks and torches? Even the sight of Peeta

and me is enough to make people pull their children away from the windows and draw the curtains tightly. We find Hazelle in her house, nursing a very sick Posy. I recognize the measles spots. "I couldn't leave her," she says. "I knew Gale'd be in the best possible hands." "Of course," I say. "He's much better. My mother says he'll be back in the mines in a couple of weeks." "May not be open until then, anyway," says Hazelle. "Word is they're closed until further notice." She gives a nervous glance at her empty washtub. "You closed down, too?" I ask. "Not officially," says Hazelle. "But everyone's afraid to use me now." "Maybe it's the snow," says Peeta. "No, Rory made a quick round this morning. Nothing to wash, apparently," she says. Rory wraps his arms around Hazelle. "We'll be all right." I take a handful of money from my pocket and lay it on the table. "My mother will send something for Posy." When we're outside, I turn to Peeta.
"You go on back. I want to walk by the Hob." "I'll go with you," he says. "No. I've dragged you into enough trouble," I tell him. "And avoiding a stroll by the Hob ... that's going to fix things for me?" He smiles and takes my hand. Together we wind through the streets of the Seam until we reach the burning building. They haven't even bothered to leave Peacekeepers around it. They know no one would try to save it. The heat from the flames melts the surrounding snow and a black trickle runs across my shoes. "It's all that coal dust, from the old days," I say. It was in every crack and crevice. Ground into the floorboards. It's amazing the place didn't go up before. "I want to check on Greasy Sae." "Not today, Katniss. I don't think we'd be helping anyone by dropping in on them," he says. We go back to the square. I buy some cakes from Peeta's father while they exchange small talk about the weather. No one mentions the ugly tools

of torture just yards from the front door. The last thing I notice as we leave the square is that I do not recognize even one of the Peacekeepers' faces. As the days pass, things go from bad to worse. The mines stay shut for two weeks, and by that time half of District 12 is starving. The number of kids signing up for tesserae soars, but they often don't receive their grain. Food shortages begin, and even those with money come away from stores empty-handed.

When the mines reopen, wages are cut, hours extended, miners sent into blatantly dangerous work sites. The eagerly awaited food promised for Parcel Day arrives spoiled and defiled by rodents. The installations in the square see plenty of action as people are dragged in and punished for offenses so long overlooked we've forgotten they are illegal. Gale goes home with no more talk of
rebellion between us. But I can't help thinking that everything he sees will only strengthen his resolve to fight back. The hardships in the mines, the tortured bodies in the square, the hunger on the faces of his family. Rory has signed up for tesserae, something Gale can't even speak about, but it's still not enough with the inconsistent availability and the ever-increasing price of food. The only bright spot is, I get Haymitch to hire Hazelle as a housekeeper, resulting in some extra money for her and greatly increasing Haymitch's standard of living. It's weird going into his house, finding it fresh and clean, food warming on the stove. He hardly notices because he's fighting a whole different battle. Peeta and I tried to ration what white liquor we had, but it's almost run out, and the last time I saw Ripper, she was in the stocks. I feel like a pariah when I walk through the streets. Everyone avoids me in public now. But there's no shortage of company

at home. A steady supply of ill and injured is deposited in our kitchen before my mother, who has long since stopped charging for her services. Her stocks of remedies are running so low, though, that soon all she'll have to treat the patients with is snow. The woods, of course, are forbidden. Absolutely. No question. Even Gale doesn't challenge this now. But one morning, I do. And it isn't the house full of the sick and dying, the bleeding backs, the gaunt-faced children, the marching boots, or the omnipresent misery that drives me under the fence. It's the arrival of a crate of wedding dresses one night with a note from Effie saying that President Snow approved these himself. The wedding. Is he really planning to go through with it? What, in his twisted brain, will that achieve? Is it for the benefit of those in the Capitol? A wedding was promised, a wedding will be given. And then he'll kill us? As a lesson to
the districts? I don't know. I can't make sense of it. I toss and turn in bed until I can't stand it anymore. I have to get out of here. At least for a few hours. My hands dig around in my closet until I find the insulated winter gear Cinna made for me for recreational use on the Victory Tour. Waterproof boots, a snowsuit

that covers me from head to toe, thermal gloves. I love my old hunting stuff, but the trek I have in mind today is more suited to this high-tech clothing. I tiptoe downstairs, load my game bag with food, and sneak out of the house. Slinking along side streets and back alleys, I make my way to the weak spot in the fence closest to Rooba the butcher's. Since many workers cross this way to get to the mines, the snow's pockmarked with footprints. Mine will not be noticed. With all his security upgrades, Thread has paid little

attention to the fence, perhaps feeling harsh weather and wild animals are enough to keep everyone safely inside. Even so, once I'm under the chain link, I cover my tracks until the trees conceal them for me. Dawn is just breaking as I retrieve a set of bow and arrows and begin to force a path through the drifted snow in the woods. I'm determined, for some reason, to get to the lake. Maybe to say good-bye to the place, to my father and the happy times we spent there, because I know I'll probably never return. Maybe just so I can draw a complete breath again. Part of me doesn't really care if they catch me, if I can see it one more time. The trip takes twice as long as usual. Cinna's clothes hold in the heat all right, and I arrive soaked with sweat under the snowsuit while my face is numb with cold. The glare of the winter sun off the snow has played games with my vision, and I am so exhausted and wrapped up in my own hopeless thoughts
that I don't notice the signs. The thin stream of smoke from the chimney, the indentations of recent footprints, the smell of steaming pine needles. I am literally a few yards from the door of the cement house when I pull up short. And that's not because of the smoke or the prints or the smell. That's because of the unmistakable click of a weapon behind me. Second nature. Instinct. I turn, drawing back the arrow, although I know already that the odds are not in my favor. I see the white Peacekeeper uniform, the pointed chin, the light brown iris where my arrow will find a home. But the weapon is dropping to the ground and the unarmed woman is holding something out to me in her gloved hand. "Stop!" she cries. I waver, unable to process this turn in events. Perhaps they have orders to bring me in alive so they can torture me into incriminating every person I ever knew. Yeah, good luck with that, I think. My fingers have all but

decided to release the arrow when I see the object in the glove. It's a small white circle of flat bread. More of a cracker, really. Gray and soggy around the edges. But an image is clearly stamped in the center of it. PART II "THE QUELL"

It's my mockingjay. It makes no sense. My bird baked into bread. Unlike the stylish renderings I saw in the Capitol, this is definitely not a fashion statement. "What is

it? What does that mean?" I ask harshly, still prepared to kill. "It means we're on your side," says a tremulous voice behind me. I didn't see her when I came up. She must have been in the house. I don't take my eyes off my current target. Probably the newcomer is armed, but I'm betting she won't risk letting me hear the click that would mean my death was
imminent, knowing I would instantly kill her companion. "Come around where I can see you," I order. "She can't, she's--" begins the woman with the cracker. "Come around!" I shout. There's a step and a dragging sound. I can hear the effort the movement requires. Another woman, or maybe I should call her a girl since she looks about my age, limps into view. She's dressed in an ill-fitting Peacekeeper's uniform complete with the white fur cloak, but it's several sizes too large for her slight frame. She carries no visible weapon. Her hands are occupied with steadying a rough crutch made from a broken branch. The toe of her right boot can't clear the snow, hence the dragging. I examine the girl's face, which is bright red from the cold. Her teeth are crooked and there's a strawberry birthmark over one of her chocolate brown eyes. This is no Peacekeeper. No citizen of the Capitol, either. "Who are you?" I ask warily but less

belligerently. "My name's Twill," says the woman. She's older. Maybe thirty-five or so. "And this is Bonnie. We've run away from District Eight." District 8! Then they must know about the uprising! "Where'd you get the uniforms?" I ask. "I stole them from the factory," says Bonnie. "We make them there. Only I thought this one would be for ... for someone else. That's why it fits so poorly." "The gun came from a dead Peacekeeper," says Twill, following my eyes. "That cracker in your hand. With the bird. What's that about?" I ask. "Don't you know, Katniss?" Bonnie appears genuinely surprised. They recognize me. Of course they recognize me. My face is uncovered and I'm standing here outside of District 12 pointing an arrow at them. Who else would I be? "I know it matches the pin I wore in the arena." "She doesn't know," says Bonnie softly. "Maybe not about any of it." Suddenly I feel the need to appear on top of things. "I know you had an
uprising in Eight." "Yes, that's why we had to get out," says Twill. "Well, you're good and out now. What are you going to do?" I ask. "We're headed for District Thirteen," Twill replies. "Thirteen?" I say. "There's no Thirteen. It got blown off the map." "Seventy-five years ago," says Twill. Bonnie shifts on her crutch and winces. "What's wrong with your leg?" I ask. "I twisted my ankle. My boots are too big," says Bonnie. I bite my lip. My instinct tells me they're telling the truth. And behind that truth is a whole lot of information I'd like to get. I step forward and retrieve Twill's gun before lowering my bow, though. Then I hesitate a moment, thinking of another day

in this woods, when Gale and I watched a hovercraft appear out of thin air and capture two escapees from the Capitol. The boy was speared and killed. The redheaded girl,

I found out when I went to the Capitol, was mutilated and turned into a mute servant called an Avox. "Anyone after you?" "We don't think so. We think they believe we were killed in a factory explosion," says Twill. "Only a fluke that we weren't." "All right, let's go inside," I say, nodding at the cement house. I follow them in, carrying the gun. Bonnie makes straight for the hearth and lowers herself onto a Peacekeeper's cloak that has been spread before it. She holds her hands to the feeble flame that burns on one end of a charred log. Her skin is so pale as to be translucent and I can see the fire glow through her flesh. Twill tries to arrange the cloak, which must have been her own, around the shivering girl. A tin gallon can has been cut in half, the lip ragged and dangerous. It sits in the ashes, filled with a handful of pine needles steaming in water. "Making tea?" I ask. "We're not sure, really. I remember seeing someone do this with pine
needles on the Hunger Games a few years back. At least, I think it was pine needles," says Twill with a frown. I remember District 8, an ugly urban place stinking of industrial fumes, the people housed in run-down tenements. Barely a blade of grass in sight. No opportunity, ever, to learn the ways of nature. It's a miracle these two have made it this far. "Out of food?" I ask. Bonnie nods. "We took what we could, but food's been so scarce. That's been gone for a while." The quaver in her voice melts my remaining defenses. She is just a malnourished, injured girl fleeing the Capitol. "Well, then this is your lucky day," I say, dropping my game bag on the floor. People are starving all over the district and we still have more than enough. So I've been spreading things around a little. I have my own priorities: Gale's family, Greasy Sae, some of the other Hob traders who were shut down. My mother has other people, patients

mostly, who she wants to help. This morning I purposely overstuffed my game bag with food, knowing my mother would see the depleted pantry and assume I was making my rounds to the hungry. I was actually buying time to go to the lake without her worrying. I intended to deliver the food this evening on my return, but now I can see that won't be happening. From the bag I pull two fresh buns with a layer of cheese baked into the top. We always seem to have a supply of these since Peeta found out they were my favorite. I toss one to Twill but cross over and place the other on Bonnie's lap since her hand-eye coordination seems a little questionable at the moment and I don't want the thing ending up in the fire. "Oh," says Bonnie. "Oh, is this all for me?" Something inside me twists as I remember another voice. Rue. In the arena. When I gave her the leg of groosling. "Oh, I've never had awhole leg to myself before." The disbelief of the chronically hungry. "Yeah, eat up," I say. Bonnie holds the bun as if she can't quite believe it's real and then sinks her teeth into it again and again, unable to stop. "It's better if you chew it." She nods, trying to slow down, but I know how hard it is when you're that hollow. "I think your tea's done." I scoot the tin can from the ashes. Twill finds two tin cups in her pack and I dip out the tea, setting it on the floor to cool. They huddle together, eating, blowing on their tea, and taking tiny, scalding sips as I build up the fire. I wait until they are sucking the grease from their fingers to ask, "So, what's your story?" And they tell me. Ever since the Hunger Games, the discontent in District 8 had been growing. It was always there, of course, to some degree. But what differed was that talk was no longer sufficient, and the idea of taking action went from a wish to a reality. The textile factories that

service Panem are loud with machinery, and the din also allowed word to pass safely, a pair of lips close to an ear, words unnoticed, unchecked. Twill taught at school, Bonnie was one of her pupils, and when the final bell had rung, both of them spent a four-hour shift at the factory that specialized in the Peacekeeper uniforms. It took months for Bonnie, who worked in the chilly inspection dock, to secure the two uniforms, a boot here, a pair of pants there. They were intended for Twill and her husband because it was understood that, once the uprising began, it would be crucial to get word of it out beyond District 8 if it were to spread and be successful. The day Peeta and I came through and made our Victory Tour appearance was actually a rehearsal of sorts. People in the crowd positioned themselves according to their teams, next to the buildings they would target when the rebellion broke out. That was the plan: to take over the
centers of power in the city like the Justice Building, the Peacekeepers' Headquarters, and the Communication Center in the square. And at other locations in the district: the railroad, the granary, the power station, and the armory. The night of my engagement, the night Peeta fell to his knees and proclaimed his undying love for me in front of the cameras in the Capitol, was the night the uprising began. It was an ideal cover. Our Victory Tour interview with Caesar Flickerman was mandatory viewing. It gave the people of District 8 a reason to be out on the streets after dark, gathering either in the square or in various community centers around the city to watch. Ordinarily such activity would have been too suspicious. Instead everyone was in place by the appointed hour, eight o'clock, when the masks went on and all hell broke loose.

Taken by surprise and overwhelmed by sheer numbers, the Peacekeepers were initially overcome by the crowds. The Communication Center, the granary, and the power station were all secured. As the Peacekeepers fell, weapons were appropriated for the rebels. There was hope that this had not been an act of madness, that in some way, if they could get the word out to other districts, an actual overthrow of the government in the Capitol might be possible. But then the ax fell. Peacekeepers began to arrive by the thousands. Hovercraft bombed the rebel strongholds into ashes. In the utter chaos that followed, it was all people could do to make it back to their homes alive. It took less than forty-eight hours to subdue the city. Then, for a week, there was a lockdown. No food, no coal, everyone forbidden to leave their homes. The only time the television showed anything but static was when the suspected instigators were
hanged in the square. Then one night, as the whole district was on the brink of starvation, came the order to return to business as usual. That meant school for Twill and Bonnie. A street made impassable by the bombs caused them to be late for their factory shift, so they were still a hundred yards away when it exploded, killing everyone inside -- including Twill's husband and Bonnie's entire family. "Someone must have told the Capitol that the idea for the uprising had started there," Twill tells me faintly. The two fled back to Twill's, where the Peacekeeper suits were still waiting. They scraped together what provisions they could, stealing freely from neighbors they now knew to be dead, and made it to the railroad station. In a warehouse near the tracks, they changed into the Peacekeeper outfits and, disguised, were able to make it onto a boxcar full of fabric on a train headed to District 6. They fled the train at a fuel stop

along the way and traveled on foot. Concealed by woods, but using the tracks for guidance, they made it to the outskirts of District 12 two days ago, where they were forced to stop when Bonnie twisted her ankle. "I understand why you're running, but what do you expect to find in District Thirteen?" I ask. Bonnie and Twill exchange a nervous glance. "We're not sure exactly," Twill says. "It's nothing but rubble," I say. "We've all seen the footage." "That's just it. They've been using the same footage for as long as anyone in District Eight can remember," says Twill. "Really?" I try to think back, to call up the images of 13 I've seen on television. "You know how they always show the Justice Building?" Twill continues. I nod. I've seen it a thousand times. "If you look very carefully, you'll see it. Up in the far right-hand corner." "See what?" I ask. Twill holds out her cracker with the bird again. "A mockingjay. Just a glimpse of it as it flies by. The
same one every time." "Back home, we think they keep reusing the old footage because the Capitol can't show what's really

there now," says Bonnie. I give a grunt of disbelief. "You're going to District Thirteen based on that? A shot of a bird? You think you're going to find some new city with people strolling around in it? And that's just fine with the Capitol?" "No," Twill says earnestly. "We think the people moved underground when everything on the surface was destroyed. We think they've managed to survive. And we think the Capitol leaves them alone because, before the Dark Days, District Thirteen's principal industry was nuclear development." "They were graphite miners," I say. But then I hesitate, because that's information I got from the Capitol. "They had a few small mines, yes. But not enough to justify a

population of that size. That, I guess, is the only thing we know for sure," says Twill. My heart's beating too quickly. What if they're right? Could it be true? Could there be somewhere to run besides the wilderness? Somewhere safe? If a community exists in District 13, would it be better to go there, where I might be able to accomplish something, instead of waiting here for my death? But then ... if there are people in District 13, with powerful weapons ... "Why haven't they helped us?" I say angrily. "If it's true, why do they leave us to live like this? With the hunger and the killings and the Games?" And suddenly I hate this imaginary underground city of District 13 and those who sit by, watching us die. They're no better than the Capitol. "We don't know," Bonnie whispers. "Right now, we're just holding on to the hope that they exist." That snaps me to my senses. These are delusions. District 13 doesn't exist because the Capitol would never let
it exist. They're probably mistaken about the footage. Mockingjays are about as rare as rocks. And about as tough. If they could survive the initial bombing of 13, they're probably doing better than ever now. Bonnie has no home. Her family is dead. Returning to District 8 or assimilating into another district would be impossible. Of course the idea of an independent, thriving District 13 draws her. I can't bring myself to tell her she's chasing a dream as insubstantial as a wisp of smoke. Perhaps she and Twill can carve out a life somehow in the woods. I doubt it, but they're so pitiful I have to try to help. First I give them all the food in my pack, grain and dried beans mostly, but there's enough to hold them for a while if they're careful. Then I take Twill out in the woods and try to explain the basics of hunting. She's got a weapon that if necessary can convert solar energy into deadly rays of power, so that could last indefinitely. When

she manages to kill her first squirrel, the poor thing is mostly a charred mess because it took a direct hit to the body. But I show her how to skin and clean it. With some practice, she'll figure it out. I cut a new crutch for Bonnie. Back at the house, I peel off an extra layer of socks for the girl, telling her to stuff them in the toes of

her boots to walk, then wear them on her feet at night. Finally I teach them how to build a proper fire. They beg me for details of the situation in District 12 and I tell them about life under Thread. I can see they think this is important information that they'll be bringing to those who run District 13, and I play along so as not to destroy their hopes. But when the light signals late afternoon, I'm out of time to humor them. "I have to go now," I say. They pour out thanks and embrace me. Tears spill from Bonnie's eyes. "I can't
believe we actually got to meet you. You're practically all anyone's talked about since--" "I know. I know. Since I pulled out those berries," I say tiredly. I hardly notice the walk home even though a wet snow begins to fall. My mind is spinning with new information about the uprising in District 8 and the unlikely but tantalizing possibility of District 13. Listening to Bonnie and Twill confirmed one thing: President Snow has been playing me for a fool. All the kisses and endearments in the world couldn't have derailed the momentum building up in District 8. Yes, my holding out the berries had been the spark, but I had no way to control the fire. He must have known that. So why visit my home, why order me to persuade the crowd of my love for Peeta? It was obviously a ploy to distract me and keep me from doing anything else inflammatory in the districts. And to entertain the people in the Capitol, of course. I suppose the wedding is

just a necessary extension of that. I'm nearing the fence when a mockingjay lights on a branch and trills at me. At the sight of it I realize I never got a full explanation of the bird on the cracker and what it signifies. "It means we're on your side." That's what Bonnie said. I have people on my side? What side? Am I unwittingly the face of the hoped-for rebellion? Has the mockingjay on my pin become a symbol of resistance? If so, my side's not doing too well. You only have to look at what happened in 8 to know that. I stash my weapons in the hollow log nearest my old home in the Seam and head for the fence. I'm crouched on one knee, preparing to enter the Meadow, but I'm still so preoccupied with the day's events that it takes a sudden screech of an owl to bring me to my senses. In the fading light, the chain links look as innocuous as usual. But what makes me jerk back my hand is the sound, like the buzz of a tree full of tracker jacker nests,
indicating the fence is alive with electricity. My feet back up automatically and I blend into the trees. I cover my mouth with my glove to disperse the white of my breath in the icy air. Adrenaline courses through me, wiping all the concerns of the day from my mind as I focus on the immediate threat before me. What is going on? Has Thread turned on the fence as an additional security precaution? Or does he somehow know I've escaped his net today? Is he determined to strand me outside District 12 until he

can apprehend and arrest me? Drag me to the square to be locked in the stockade or whipped or hanged? Calm down, I order myself. It's not as if this is the first time I've been caught outside of the district by an electrified fence. It's happened a few times over the years, but Gale was always with me. The two of us would just pick a comfortable tree to

hang out in until the power shut off, which it always did eventually. If I was running late, Prim even got in the habit of going to the Meadow to check if the fence was charged, to spare my mother worry. But today my family would never imagine I'd be in the woods. I've even taken steps to mislead them. So if I don't show up, worry they will. And there's a part of me that's worried, too, because I'm not sure it's just a coincidence, the power coming on the very day I return to the woods. I thought no one saw me sneak under the fence, but who knows? There are always eyes for hire. Someone reported Gale kissing me in that very spot. Still, that was in daylight and before I was more careful about my behavior. Could there be surveillance cameras? I've wondered about this before. Is this the way President Snow knows about the kiss? It was dark when I went under and my face was bundled in a scarf. But the list of suspects likely to be trespassing into
the woods is probably very short. My eyes peer through the trees, past the fence, into the Meadow. All I can see is the wet snow illuminated here and there by the light from the windows on the edge of the Seam. No Peacekeepers in sight, no signs I am being hunted. Whether Thread knows I left the district today or not, I realize my course of action must be the same: to get back inside the fence unseen and pretend I never left. Any contact with the chain link or the coils of barbed wire that guard the top would mean instant electrocution. I don't think I can burrow under the fence without risking detection, and the ground's frozen hard, anyway. That leaves only one choice. Somehow I'm going to have to go over it. I begin to skirt along the tree line, searching for a tree with a branch high and long enough to fit my needs. After about a mile, I come upon an old maple that might do. The trunk is too wide and icy to shinny up, though,

and there are no low branches. I climb a neighboring tree and leap precariously into the maple, almost losing my hold on the slick bark. But I manage to get a grip and slowly inch my way out on a limb that hangs above the barbed wire. As I look down, I remember why Gale and I always waited in the woods rather than try to tackle the fence. Being high enough to avoid getting fried means you've got to be at least twenty feet in the air. I guess my branch must be twenty-five. That's a dangerously long drop, even for someone who's had years of practice in trees. But what choice do I have? I could look for another branch, but it's almost dark now. The falling snow will obscure any moonlight. Here, at least, I can

see I've got a snowbank to cushion my landing. Even if I could find another, which is doubtful, who knows what I'd be jumping into? I throw my empty game bag around my
neck and slowly lower myself until I'm hanging by my hands. For a moment, I gather my courage. Then I release my fingers. There's the sensation of falling, then I hit the ground with a jolt that goes right up my spine. A second later, my rear end slams the ground. I lie in the snow, trying to assess the damage. Without standing, I can tell by the pain in my left heel and my tailbone that I'm injured. The only question is how badly. I'm hoping for bruises, but when I force myself onto my feet, I suspect I've broken something as well. I can walk, though, so I get moving, trying to hide my limp as best I can. My mother and Prim can't know I was in the woods. I need to work up some sort of alibi, no matter how thin. Some of the shops in the square are still open, so I go in one and purchase white cloth for bandages. We're running low, anyway. In another, I buy a bag of sweets for Prim. I stick one of the candies in my mouth, feeling the

peppermint melt on my tongue, and realize it's the first thing I've eaten all day. I meant to make a meal at the lake, but once I saw Twill and Bonnie's condition, it seemed wrong to take a single mouthful from them. By the time I reach my house, my left heel will bear no weight at all. I decide to tell my mother I was trying to mend a leak in the roof of our old house and slid off. As for the missing food, I'll just be vague about who I handed it out to. I drag myself in the door, all ready to collapse in front of the fire. But instead I get another

shock. Two Peacekeepers, a man and a woman, are standing in the doorway to our kitchen. The woman remains impassive, but I catch the flicker of surprise on the man's face. I am unanticipated. They know I was in the woods and should be trapped there now. "Hello," I say in a neutral
voice. My mother appears behind them, but keeps her distance. "Here she is, just in time for dinner," she says a little too brightly. I'm very late for dinner. I consider removing my boots as I normally would but doubt I can manage it without revealing my injuries. Instead I just pull off my wet hood and shake the snow from my hair. "Can I help you with something?" I ask the Peacekeepers. "Head Peacekeeper Thread sent us with a message for you," says the woman. "They've been waiting for hours," my mother adds. They've been waiting for me to fail to return. To confirm I got electrocuted by the fence or trapped in the woods so they could take my family in for questioning. "Must be an important message," I say. "May we ask where you've been, Miss Everdeen?" the woman asks. "Easier to ask where I haven't been," I say with a sound of exasperation. I cross into the kitchen, forcing myself to use my foot normally

even though every step is excruciating. I pass between the Peacekeepers and make it to the table all right. I fling my bag down and turn to Prim, who's standing stiffly by the hearth. Haymitch and Peeta are there as well, sitting in a pair of matching rockers, playing a game of chess. Were they here by chance or "invited" by the Peacekeepers? Either way, I'm glad to see them. "So where haven't you been?" says Haymitch in a bored voice. "Well, I haven't been talking to the Goat Man about getting Prim's goat pregnant, because someone gave me completely inaccurate information as to where he lives," I say to Prim emphatically. "No, I didn't," says Prim. "I told you exactly." "You said he lives beside the west entrance to the mine," I say. "The east entrance," Prim corrects me. "You distinctly said the west, because then I said, 'Next to the slag heap?' and you said, 'Yeah,'" I say. "The slag heap next to the east entrance," says Prim patiently.
"No. When did you say that?" I demand. "Last night," Haymitch chimes in. "It was definitely the east," adds Peeta. He looks at Haymitch and they laugh. I glare at Peeta and he tries to look contrite. "I'm sorry, but it's what I've been saying. You don't listen when people talk to you." "Bet people told you he didn't live there today and you didn't listen again," says Haymitch. "Shut up, Haymitch," I say, clearly indicating he's right. Haymitch and Peeta crack up and Prim allows herself a smile. "Fine. Somebody else can arrange to get the stupid goat knocked up," I say, which makes them laugh more. And I think, This is why they've made it this far, Haymitch and Peeta. Nothing throws them. I look at the Peacekeepers. The man's smiling but the woman is

unconvinced. "What's in the bag?" she asks sharply. I know she's hoping for game or wild plants. Something that

clearly condemns me. I dump the contents on the table. "See for yourself." "Oh, good," says my mother, examining the cloth. "We're running low on bandages." Peeta comes to the table and opens the candy bag. "Ooh, peppermints," he says, popping one in his mouth. "They're mine." I take a swipe for the bag. He tosses it to Haymitch, who stuffs a fistful of sweets in his mouth before passing the bag to a giggling Prim. "None of you deserves candy!" I say. "What, because we're right?" Peeta wraps his arms around me. I give a small yelp of pain as my tailbone objects. I try to turn it into a sound of indignation, but I can see in his eyes that he knows I'm hurt. "Okay, Prim said west. I distinctly heard west. And we're all idiots. How's that?" "Better," I say, and accept his kiss. Then I look at the Peacekeepers as if I'm suddenly remembering they're there. "You have a message for me?" "From Head Peacekeeper Thread," says the woman.
"He wanted you to know that the fence surrounding District Twelve will now have electricity twenty-four hours a day." "Didn't it already?" I ask, a little too innocently. "He thought you might be interested in passing this information on to your cousin," says the woman. "Thank you. I'll tell him. I'm sure we'll all sleep a little more soundly now that security has addressed that lapse." I'm pushing things, I know it, but the comment gives me a sense of satisfaction. The woman's jaw tightens. None of this has gone as planned, but she has no further orders. She gives me a curt nod and leaves, the man trailing in her wake. When my mother has locked the door behind them, I slump against the table. "What is it?" says Peeta, holding me steadily. "Oh, I banged up my left foot. The heel. And my tail-bone's had a bad day, too." He helps me over to one of the rockers and I lower myself onto the padded cushion. My mother eases off my boots. "What

happened?" "I slipped and fell," I say. Four pairs of eyes look at me with disbelief. "On some ice." But we all know the house must be bugged and it's not safe to talk openly. Not here, not now. Having stripped off my sock, my mother's fingers probe the bones in my left heel and I wince. "There might be a break," she says. She checks the other foot. "This one seems all right." She judges my tailbone to be badly bruised. Prim's dispatched to get my pajamas and robe. When I'm changed, my mother makes a snow pack for my left heel and props it up on a hassock. I eat three bowls of stew and half a loaf of bread while the others dine at the table. I stare at the fire, thinking of Bonnie and Twill, hoping that the heavy, wet snow has erased my tracks. Prim comes and sits on the floor next to me, leaning her head against my knee. We suck on peppermints as I brush her soft blond hair back behind her ear. "How was school?" I ask. "All right.We learned about coal by-products," she says. We stare at the fire for a while. "Are you going to try on your wedding dresses?" "Not tonight. Tomorrow probably," I say. "Wait until I get home, okay?" she says. "Sure." If they don't arrest me first. My mother gives me a cup of chamomile tea with a dose of sleep syrup, and my eyelids begin to droop immediately. She wraps my bad foot, and Peeta volunteers to get me to bed. I start out by leaning on his shoulder, but I'm so wobbly he just scoops me up and carries me upstairs. He tucks me in and says good night but I catch his hand and hold him there. A side effect of the sleep syrup is that it makes people less inhibited, like white liquor, and I know I have to control my tongue. But I don't want him to go. In fact, I want him to climb in with me, to be there when the nightmares hit tonight. For some reason that I can't quite form, I know I'm not allowed to ask that. "Don't go yet. Not

until I fall asleep," I say. Peeta sits on the side of the bed, warming my hand in both of his. "Almost thought you'd changed your mind today. When you were late for dinner." I'm foggy but I can guess what he means. With the fence going on and me showing up late and the Peacekeepers waiting, he thought I'd made a run for it, maybe with Gale. "No, I'd have told you," I say. I pull his hand up and lean my cheek against the back of it, taking in the faint scent of cinnamon and dill from the breads he must have baked today. I want to tell him about Twill and Bonnie and the uprising and the fantasy of District 13, but it's not safe to and I can feel myself slipping away, so I just get out one more sentence. "Stay with me." As the tendrils of sleep syrup pull me down, I hear him whisper a word back, but I don't quite catch it. My mother lets me sleep until noon, then rouses me to examine my heel. I'm ordered to a week of bed rest and I
don't object because I feel so lousy. Not just my heel and my tailbone. My whole body aches with exhaustion. So I let my mother doctor me and feed me breakfast in bed and tuck another quilt around me. Then I just lie there, staring out my window at the winter sky, pondering how on earth this will all turn out. I think a lot about Bonnie and Twill, and the pile of white wedding dresses downstairs, and if Thread will figure out how I got back in and arrest me. It's funny, because he could just arrest me, anyway, based on past crimes, but maybe he has to have something really irrefutable to do it, now that I'm a victor. And I wonder if President Snow's in contact with Thread. I think it's unlikely he ever acknowledged that old Cray existed, but now that I'm such a nationwide problem, is he carefully instructing Thread what to do? Or is Thread acting on his own? At any rate, I'm sure they'd both agree on keeping me locked up

here inside the district with that fence. Even if I could figure out some way to escape--maybe get a rope up to that maple tree branch and

climb out--there'd be no escaping with my family and friends now. I told Gale I would stay and fight, anyway. For the next few days, I jump every time there's a knock on the door. No Peacekeepers show up to arrest me, though, so eventually I begin to relax. I'm further reassured when Peeta casually tells me the power is off in sections of the fence because crews are out securing the base of the chain link to the ground. Thread must believe I somehow got under the thing, even with that deadly current running through it. It's a break for the district, having the Peacekeepers busy doing something besides abusing people. Peeta comes by every day to bring me cheese buns and begins to help me work on
the family book. It's an old thing, made of parchment and leather. Some herbalist on my mother's side of the family started it ages ago. The book's composed of page after page of ink drawings of plants with descriptions of their medical uses. My father added a section on edible plants that was my guidebook to keeping us alive after his death. For a long time, I've wanted to record my own knowledge in it. Things I learned from experience or from Gale, and then the information I picked up when I was training for the Games. I didn't because I'm no artist and it's so crucial that the pictures are drawn in exact detail. That's where Peeta comes in. Some of the plants he knows already, others we have dried samples of, and others I have to describe. He makes sketches on scrap paper until I'm satisfied they're right, then I let him draw them in the book. After that, I carefully print all I know about the plant. It's quiet, absorbing work that

helps take my mind off my troubles. I like to watch his hands as he works, making a blank page bloom with strokes of ink, adding touches of color to our previously black and yellowish book. His face takes on a special look when he concentrates. His usual easy expression is replaced by something more intense and removed that suggests an entire world locked away inside him. I've seen flashes of this before: in the arena, or when he speaks to a crowd, or that time he shoved the Peacekeepers' guns away from me in District 11. I don't know quite what to make of it. I also become a little fixated on his eyelashes, which ordinarily you don't notice much because they're so blond. But up close, in the sunlight slanting in from the window, they're a light golden color and so long I don't see how they keep from getting all tangled up when he blinks. One afternoon Peeta stops shading a blossom and looks up so suddenly that I start, as though I were caught spying on him, which in a strange way maybe I was. But he only says, "You know, I think this is the first time we've ever done anything normal together." "Yeah," I agree. Our whole relationship has been tainted by the Games. Normal was never a part of it. "Nice for a change." Each afternoon he carries me downstairs for a change of scenery and I unnerve everyone by turning on the television. Usually we only watch when it's mandatory, because the mixture of propaganda and displays of the Capitol's power--including clips from seventy-four years of Hunger Games -- is so odious. But now I'm looking for something special. The mockingjay that Bonnie and Twill are basing all their hopes on. I know it's probably foolishness, but if it is, I want to rule it out. And erase the idea of a thriving District 13 from my

mind for good. My first sighting is in a news story referencing the Dark Days. I see the smoldering remains of the Justice Building in District 13 and just catch the black-and-white underside of a mockingjay's wing as it flies across the upper right-hand corner. That doesn't prove anything, really. It's just an old shot that goes with an old tale. However, several days later, something else grabs my attention. The main newscaster is reading a piece about a shortage of graphite affecting the manufacturing of items in District 3. They cut to what is supposed to be live footage of a female reporter, encased in a protective suit, standing in front of the ruins of the Justice Building in 13. Through her mask, she reports that unfortunately a study has just today determined that the mines of District 13 are still too toxic to approach. End of story. But just before they cut back to the main newscaster, I see the unmistakable flash of that same
mockingjays wing. The reporter has simply been incorporated into the old footage. She's not in District 13 at all. Which begs the question, What is? Staying quietly in bed is harder after that. I want to be doing something, finding out more about District 13 or helping in the cause to bring down the Capitol. Instead I sit around stuffing myself with cheese buns and watching Peeta sketch. Haymitch stops by occasionally to bring me news from town, which is always bad. More people being punished or dropping from starvation. Winter has begun to withdraw by the time my foot is deemed usable. My mother gives me exercises to do and lets me walk on my own a bit. I go to sleep one night, determined to go into town the next morning, but I awake to find Venia, Octavia, and Flavius grinning down at me. "Surprise!" they squeal. "We're here early!" After I took that lash in the face, Haymitch got their visit pushed back several

months so I could heal up. I wasn't expecting them for another three weeks. But I try to act delighted that my bridal photo shoot is here at last. My mother hung up

all the dresses, so they're ready to go, but to be honest, I haven't even tried one on. After the usual histrionics about the deteriorated state of my beauty, they get right down to business. Their biggest concern is my face, although I think my mother did a pretty remarkable job healing it. There's just a pale pink strip across my cheekbone. The whipping's not common knowledge, so I tell them I slipped on the ice and cut it. And then I realize that's my same excuse for hurting my foot, which is going to make walking in high heels a problem. But Flavius, Octavia, and Venia aren't the suspicious types, so I'm safe there. Since I only have to look hairless for a few hours instead of several weeks, I get to be
shaved instead of waxed. I still have to soak in a tub of something, but it isn't vile, and we're on to my hair and makeup before I know it. The team, as usual, is full of news, which I usually do my best to tune out. But then Octavia makes a comment that catches my attention. It's a passing remark, really, about how she couldn't get shrimp for a party, but it tugs at me. "Why couldn't you get shrimp? Is it out of season?" I ask. "Oh, Katniss, we haven't been able to get any seafood for weeks!" says Octavia. "You know, because the weather's been so bad in District Four." My mind starts buzzing. No seafood. For weeks. From District 4. The barely concealed rage in the crowd during the Victory Tour. And suddenly I am absolutely sure that District 4 has revolted. I begin to question them casually about what other hardships this winter has brought them. They are not used to want, so any little disruption in supply makes an impact on them. By

the time I'm ready to be dressed, their complaints about the difficulty of getting different products -- from crabmeat to music chips to ribbons -- has given me a sense of which districts might actually be rebelling. Seafood from District 4. Electronic gadgets from District 3. And, of course, fabrics from District 8. The thought of such widespread rebellion has me quivering with fear and excitement. I want to ask them more, but Cinna appears to give me a hug and check my makeup. His attention goes right to the scar on my cheek. Somehow I don't think he believes the slipping-on-the-ice story, but he doesn't question it. He simply adjusts the powder on my face, and what little you can see of the lash mark vanishes. Downstairs, the living room has been cleared and lit for the photo shoot. Effie's having a fine time ordering everybody around, keeping us all on schedule. It's probably a good thing, because there are six gowns and each
one requires its own headpiece, shoes, jewelry, hair, makeup, setting, and lighting. Creamy lace and pink roses and ringlets. Ivory satin and gold tattoos and greenery. A sheath of diamonds and jeweled veil and moonlight. Heavy white silk and sleeves that fall from my wrist to the floor, and pearls. The moment one shot has been approved, we move right into

preparing for the next. I feel like dough, being kneaded and reshaped again and again. My mother manages to feed me bits of food and sips of tea while they work on me, but by the time the shoot is over, I'm starving and exhausted. I'm hoping to spend some time with Cinna now, but Effie whisks everybody out the door and I have to make do with the promise of a phone call. Evening has fallen and my foot hurts from all the crazy shoes, so I abandon any thoughts of going

into town. Instead I go upstairs and wash away the layers of makeup and conditioners and dyes and then go down to dry my hair by the fire. Prim, who came home from school in time to see the last two dresses, chatters on about them with my mother. They both seem overly happy about the photo shoot. When I fall into bed, I realize it's because they think it means I'm safe. That the Capitol has overlooked my interference with the whipping since no one is going to go to such trouble and expense for someone they plan on killing, anyway. Right. In my nightmare, I'm dressed in the silk bridal gown, but it's torn and muddy. The long sleeves keep getting caught on thorns and branches as I run through the woods. The pack of muttation tributes draws closer and closer until it overcomes me with hot breath and dripping fangs and I scream myself awake. It's too close to dawn to bother trying to get back to sleep. Besides, today I really
preparing for the next. I feel like dough, being kneaded and reshaped again and again. My mother manages to feed me bits of food and sips of tea while they work on me, but by the time the shoot is over, I'm starving and exhausted. I'm hoping to spend some time with Cinna now, but Effie whisks everybody out the door and I have to make do with the promise of a phone call. Evening has fallen and my foot hurts from all the crazy shoes, so I abandon any thoughts of going into town. Instead I go upstairs and wash away the layers of makeup and conditioners and dyes and then go down to dry my hair by the fire. Prim, who came home from school in time to see the last two dresses, chatters on about them with my mother. They both seem overly happy about the photo shoot. When I fall into bed, I realize it's because they think it means I'm safe. That the Capitol has overlooked my interference with the whipping since no one is going to go to

such trouble and expense for someone they plan on killing, anyway. Right. In my nightmare, I'm dressed in the silk bridal gown, but it's torn and muddy. The long sleeves keep getting caught on thorns and branches as I run through the woods. The pack of muttation tributes draws closer and closer until it overcomes me with hot breath and dripping fangs and I scream myself awake. It's too close to dawn to bother trying to get back to sleep. Besides, today I really have to get out and talk to someone. Gale will be unreachable in the mines. But I need Haymitch or Peeta or somebody to share the burden of all that has happened to me since I went to the lake. Fleeing outlaws, electrified fences, an independent District 13, shortages in the Capitol. Everything. I eat breakfast with my mother and Prim and head out in search of a confidant. The air's warm with hopeful hints of spring in it. Spring would be a good time for
an uprising, I think. Everyone feels less vulnerable once winter passes. Peeta's not home. I guess he's already gone into town. I'm surprised to see Haymitch moving around his kitchen so early, though. I walk into his house without knocking. I can hear Hazelle upstairs, sweeping the floors of the now-spotless house. Haymitch isn't flat-out drunk, but he doesn't look too steady, either. I guess the rumors about Ripper being back in business are true. I'm thinking maybe I better let him just go to bed, when he suggests a walk to town. Haymitch and I can speak in a kind of shorthand now. In a few minutes I've updated him and he's told me about rumors of uprisings in Districts 7 and 11 as well. If my hunches are right, this would mean almost half the districts have at least attempted to rebel. "Do you still think it won't work here?" I ask. "Not yet. Those other districts, they're much larger. Even if half the people cower

in their homes, the rebels stand a chance. Here in Twelve, it's got to be all of us or nothing," he says. I hadn't thought of that. How we lack strength of numbers. "But maybe at

some point?" I insist. "Maybe. But we're small, we're weak, and we don't develop nuclear weapons," says Haymitch with a touch of sarcasm. He didn't get too excited over my District 13 story. "What do you think they'll do, Haymitch? To the districts that are rebelling?" I ask. "Well, you've heard what they did in Eight. You've seen what they did here, and that was without provocation," says Haymitch. "If things really do get out of hand, I think they'd have no problem killing off another district, same as they did Thirteen. Make an example of it, you know?" "So you think Thirteen was really destroyed? I mean, Bonnie and Twill were right about the footage of the mocking-jay," I say.
"Okay, but what does that prove? Nothing, really. There are plenty of reasons they could be using old footage. Probably it looks more impressive. And it's a lot simpler, isn't it? To just press a few buttons in the editing room than to fly all the way out there and film it?" he says. "The idea that Thirteen has somehow rebounded and the Capitol is ignoring it? That sounds like the kind of rumor desperate people cling to." "I know. I was just hoping," I say. "Exactly. Because you're desperate," says Haymitch. I don't argue because, of course, he's right. Prim comes home from school bubbling over with excitement. The teachers announced there was mandatory programming tonight. "I think it's going to be your photo shoot!" "It can't be, Prim. They only did the pictures yesterday," I tell her. "Well, that's what somebody heard," she says. I'm hoping she's wrong. I haven't had time to prepare Gale for any of this. Since the whipping, I only see

him when he comes to the house for my mother to check how he's healing. He's often scheduled seven days a week in the mine. In the few minutes of privacy we've had, with me walking him back to town, I gather that the rumblings of an uprising in 12 have been subdued by Thread's crackdown. He knows I'm not going to run. But he must also know that if we don't revolt in 12, I'm destined to be Peeta's bride. Seeing me lounging around in gorgeous gowns on his television ... what can he do with that? When we gather around the television at seven-thirty, I discover that Prim is right. Sure enough, there's Caesar Flickerman, speaking before a standing-room-only crowd in front of the Training Center, talking to an appreciative crowd about my upcoming nuptials. He introduces Cinna, who became an overnight star with his costumes for me in the Games, and after a minute of good-natured chitchat, we're directed to
turn our attention to a giant screen. I see now how they could photograph me yesterday and present the special tonight. Initially, Cinna designed two dozen wedding gowns. Since then, there's been the process of narrowing down the designs, creating the dresses, and choosing the accessories. Apparently, in the Capitol, there were opportunities to vote for your favorites at each stage. This is all

culminating with shots of me in the final six dresses, which I'm sure took no time at all to insert in the show. Each shot is met with a huge reaction from the crowd. People screaming and cheering for their favorites, booing the ones they don't like. Having voted, and probably bet on the winner, people are very invested in my wedding gown. It's bizarre to watch when I think how I never even bothered to try one on before the cameras arrived. Caesar announces

that interested parties must cast their final vote by noon on the following day. "Let's get Katniss Everdeen to her wedding in style!" he hollers to the crowd. I'm about to shut off the television, but then Caesar is telling us to stay tuned for the other big event of the evening. "That's right, this year will be the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Hunger Games, and that means it's time for our third Quarter Quell!" "What will they do?" asks Prim. "It isn't for months yet. We turn to our mother, whose expression is solemn and distant, as if she's remembering something. "It must be the reading of the card." The anthem plays, and my throat tightens with revulsion as President Snow takes the stage. He's followed by a young boy dressed in a white suit, holding a simple wooden box. The anthem ends, and President Snow begins to speak, to remind us all of the Dark Days from which the Hunger Games were born. When the laws for the Games were laid
out, they dictated that every twenty-five years the anniversary would be marked by a Quarter Quell. It would call for a glorified version of the Games to make fresh the memory of those killed by the districts' rebellion.

These words could not be more pointed, since I suspect several districts are rebelling right now. President Snow goes on to tell us what happened in the previous Quarter Quells. "On the twenty-fifth anniversary, as a reminder to the rebels that their children were dying because of their choice to initiate violence, every district was made to hold an election and vote on the tributes who would represent it." I wonder how that would have felt. Picking the kids who had to go. It is worse, I think, to be turned over by your own neighbors than have your name drawn from the reaping ball. "On the fiftieth anniversary," the

president continues, "as a reminder that two rebels died for each Capitol citizen, every district was required to send twice as many tributes." I imagine facing a field of forty-seven instead of twenty-three. Worse odds, less hope, and ultimately more dead kids. That was the year Haymitch won... . "I had a friend who went that year," says my mother quietly. "Maysilee Donner. Her parents owned the sweetshop. They gave me her songbird after. A canary." Prim and I exchange a look. It's the first we've ever heard of Maysilee Donner. Maybe because my mother knew we would want to know how she died. "And now we honor our third Quarter Quell," says the president. The little boy in white steps forward, holding out the box as he opens the lid. We can see the tidy, upright rows of yellowed envelopes. Whoever devised the Quarter Quell system had prepared for centuries of Hunger Games. The president removes an
envelope clearly marked with a 75. He runs his finger under the flap and pulls out a small square of paper. Without hesitation, he reads, "On the seventy-fifth anniversary, as a reminder to the rebels that even the strongest among them cannot overcome the power of the Capitol, the male and female tributes will be reaped from their existing pool of victors." My mother gives a faint shriek and Prim buries her face in her hands, but I feel more like the people I see in the crowd on television. Slightly baffled. What does it mean? Existing pool of victors? Then I get it, what it means. At least, for me. District 12 only has three existing victors to choose from. Two male. One female ... I am going back into the arena. My body reacts before my mind does and I'm running out the door, across the lawns of the Victor's Village, into the dark beyond. Moisture from the sodden ground soaks my socks and I'm aware of the sharp bite of the

wind, but I don't stop. Where? Where to go? The woods, of course. I'm at the fence before the hum makes me remember how very trapped I am. I back away, panting, turn on my heel, and take off again. The next thing I know I'm on my hands and knees in the cellar of one of the empty houses in the Victor's Village. Faint shafts of moonlight come in through the window wells above my head. I'm cold and wet and winded, but my escape attempt has done nothing to subdue the hysteria rising up

inside me. It will drown me unless it's released. I ball up the front of my shirt, stuff it into my mouth, and begin to scream. How long this continues, I don't know. But when I stop, my voice is almost gone. I curl up on my side and stare at the patches of moonlight on the cement floor. Back in the arena. Back in the place of nightmares. That's where I am
going. I have to admit I didn't see it coming. I saw a multitude of other things. Being publicly humiliated, tortured, and executed. Fleeing through the wilderness, pursued by Peacekeepers and hovercraft. Marriage to Peeta with our children forced into the arena. But never that I myself would have to be a player in the Games again. Why? Because there's no precedent for it. Victors are out of the reaping for life. That's the deal if you win. Until now. There's some kind of sheeting, the kind they put down when they paint. I pull it over me like a blanket. In the distance, someone is calling my name. But at the moment, I excuse myself from thinking about even those I love most. I think only of me. And what lies ahead. The sheeting's stiff but holds warmth. My muscles relax, my heart rate slows. I see the wooden box in the little boy's hands, President Snow drawing out the yellowed envelope. Is it possible that this

was really the Quarter Quell written down seventy-five years ago? It seems unlikely. It's just too perfect an answer for the troubles that face the Capitol today. Getting rid of me and subduing the districts all in one neat little package. I hear President Snow's voice in my head. "On the seventy-fifth anniversary, as a reminder to the rebels that even the strongest among them cannot overcome the power of the Capitol, the male and female tributes will be reaped from their existing pool of victors." Yes, victors are our strongest. They're the ones who survived the arena and slipped the noose of poverty that strangles the rest of us. They, or should I say we, are the very embodiment of hope where there is no hope. And now twenty-three of us will be killed to show how even that hope was an illusion. I'm glad I won only last year. Otherwise I'd know all the other victors, not just because I see them on television but because they're guests
at every Games. Even if they're not mentoring like Haymitch always has to, most return to the Capitol each year for the event. I think a lot of them are friends. Whereas the only friend I'll have to worry about killing will be either Peeta or Haymitch. Peeta or Haymitch! I sit straight up, throwing off the sheeting. What just went through my mind? There's no situation in which I would ever kill Peeta or Haymitch. But one of them will be in the arena with me, and that's a fact. They may have even decided between them who it will be. Whoever is picked first, the other will have the option of volunteering to take his place. I already know what will happen. Peeta will ask Haymitch to let him go into the arena with me no matter what. For

my sake. To protect me. I stumble around the cellar, looking for an exit. How did I even get into this place? I feel

my way up the steps to the kitchen and see the glass window in the door has been shattered. Must be why my hand seems to be bleeding. I hurry back into the night and head straight to Haymitch's house. He's sitting alone at the kitchen table, a half-emptied bottle of white liquor in one fist, his knife in the other. Drunk as a skunk. "Ah, there she is. All tuckered out. Finally did the math, did you, sweetheart? Worked out you won't be going in alone? And now you're here to ask me ... what?" he says. I don't answer. The window's wide open and the wind cuts through me just as if I were outside. "I'll admit, it was easier for the boy. He was here before I could snap the seal on a bottle. Begging me for another chance to go in. But what can you say?" He mimics my voice. '"Take his place, Haymitch, because all things being equal, I'd rather Peeta had a crack at the rest of his life than you? I bite my lip because once he's said it, I'm afraid
that's what I do want. For Peeta to live, even if it means Haymitch's death. No, I don't. He's dreadful, of course, but Haymitch is my family now. What did I come for? I think. What could I possibly want here? "I came for a drink," I say. Haymitch bursts out laughing and slams the bottle on the table before me. I run my sleeve across the top and take a couple gulps before I come up choking. It takes a few minutes to compose myself, and even then my eyes and nose are still streaming. But inside me, the liquor feels like fire and I like it. "Maybe it should be you," I say matter-of-factly as I pull up a chair. "You hate life, anyway." "Very true," says Haymitch. "And since last time I tried to keep you alive... seems like I'm obligated to save the boy this time." "That's another good point," I say, wiping my nose and tipping up the bottle again. "Peeta's argument is that since I chose you, I now owe him. Anything he wants. And what he wants is the

chance to go in again to protect you," says Haymitch. I knew it. In this way, Peeta's not hard to predict. While I was wallowing around on the floor of that cellar, thinking only of myself, he was here, thinking only of me. Shame isn't a strong enough word for what I feel. "You could live a hundred lifetimes and not deserve him, you know," Haymitch says. "Yeah, yeah," I say brusquely. "No question, he's the superior one in this trio. So, what are you going to do?" "I don't know." Haymitch sighs. "Go back in with you maybe, if I can. If my name's drawn at the reaping, it won't matter. He'll just volunteer to take my place." We sit for a while in silence. "It'd be bad for you in the arena, wouldn't it? Knowing all the others?" I ask. "Oh, I think we can count on it being unbearable wherever I am." He nods at the bottle. "Can I have that back now?" "No," I say, wrapping my arms around it. Haymitch pullsanother bottle out from under the table and gives the top a twist. But I realize I am not just here for a drink. There's something else I want from Haymitch. "Okay, I figured out what I'm asking," I say. "If it is Peeta and me in the Games, this time we try to keep him alive." Something flickers across his bloodshot eyes. Pain. "Like you said, it's going to be bad no matter how you slice it. And whatever Peeta wants, it's his turn to be saved. We both owe him that." My voice takes on a pleading tone. "Besides, the Capitol hates me so much, I'm as good as dead now. He still might have a chance. Please, Haymitch. Say you'll help me." He frowns at his bottle, weighing my words. "All right," he says finally. "Thanks," I say. I should go see Peeta now, but I don't want to. My head's spinning from the drink, and I'm so wiped out, who knows what he could get me to agree to? No, now I have to go home to face my mother and Prim. As I stagger up the steps to my

house, the front door opens and Gale pulls me into his arms. "I was wrong. We should have gone when you said," he whispers. "No," I say. I'm having trouble focusing, and liquor keeps sloshing out of my bottle and down the back of Gale's jacket, but he doesn't seem to care. "It's not too late," he says. Over his shoulder, I see my mother and Prim clutching each other in the doorway. We run. They die. And now I've got Peeta to protect. End of discussion. "Yeah, it is." My knees give way and he's holding me up. As the alcohol overcomes my mind, I hear the glass bottle shatter on the floor. This seems appropriate since I have obviously lost my grip on everything. When I wake up, I barely get to the toilet before the white liquor makes its reappearance. It burns just as much coming up as it did going down, and tastes twice as bad. I'm trembling and sweaty when I finish vomiting, but at least most of the stuff is out of my system. Enough made it
into my bloodstream, though, to result in a pounding headache, parched mouth, and boiling stomach. I turn on the shower and stand under the warm rain for a minute before I realize I'm still in my underclothes. My mother must have just stripped off my filthy outer ones and tucked me in bed. I throw the wet undergarments into the sink and pour shampoo on my head. My hands sting, and that's when I notice the stitches, small and even, across one palm and up the side of the other hand. Vaguely I remember breaking that glass window last night. I scrub myself from head to toe, only stopping to throw up again right in the shower. It's mostly just bile and goes down the drain with the sweet-smelling bubbles. Finally clean, I pull on my robe and head back to bed, ignoring my dripping hair. I climb under the blankets, sure this is what it must feel like to be poisoned. The footsteps on the stairs renew my panic from last night.

I'm not ready to see my mother and Prim. I have to pull myself together to be calm and reassuring, the way I

was when we said our good-byes the day of the last reaping. I have to be strong. I struggle into an upright position, push my wet hair off my throbbing temples, and brace myself for this meeting. They appear in the doorway, holding tea and toast, their faces filled with concern. I open my mouth, planning to start off with some kind of joke, and burst into tears. So much for being strong. My mother sits on the side of the bed and Prim crawls right up next to me and they hold me, making quiet soothing sounds, until I am mostly cried out. Then Prim gets a towel and dries my hair, combing out the knots, while my mother coaxes tea and toast into me. They dress me in warm pajamas and layer more blankets on me and I drift off again. I can tell by the
light it's late afternoon when I come round again. There's a glass of water on my bedside table and I gulp it down thirstily. My stomach and head still

feel rocky, but much better than they did earlier. I rise, dress, and braid back my hair. Before I go down, I pause at the top of the stairs, feeling slightly embarrassed about the way I've handled the news of the Quarter Quell. My erratic flight, drinking with Haymitch, weeping. Given the circumstances, I guess I deserve one day of indulgence. I'm glad the cameras weren't here for it, though. Downstairs, my mother and Prim embrace me again, but they're not overly emotional. I know they're holding things in to make it easier on me. Looking at Prim's face, it's hard to imagine she's the same frail little girl I left behind on reaping day nine months ago. The combination of that ordeal and all that has

followed--the cruelty in the district, the parade of sick and wounded that she often treats by herself now if my mother's hands are too full -- these things have aged her years. She's grown quite a bit, too; we're practically the same height now, but that isn't what makes her seem so much older. My mother ladles out a mug of broth for me, and I ask for a second mug to take to Haymitch. Then I walk across the lawn to his house. He's only just waking up and accepts the mug without comment. We sit there, almost peacefully, sipping our broth and watching the sun set through his living room window. I hear someone walking around upstairs and I assume it's Hazelle, but a few minutes later Peeta comes down and tosses a cardboard box of empty liquor bottles on the table with finality. "There, it's done," he says. It's taking all of Haymitch's resources to focus his eyes on the bottles, so I speak up. "What's done?" "I've poured all the liquor down
the drain," says Peeta. This seems to jolt Haymitch out of his stupor, and he paws through the box in disbelief. "You what?" "I tossed the lot," says Peeta. "He'll just buy more," I say. "No, he won't," says Peeta. "I tracked down Ripper this morning and told her I'd turn her in the second she sold to either of you. I paid her off, too, just for good measure, but I don't think she's eager to be back in the Peacekeepers' custody." Haymitch takes a swipe with his knife but Peeta deflects it so easily it's pathetic. Anger rises up in me. "What business is it of yours what he does?" "It's completely my business. However it falls out, two of us are going to be in the arena again with the other as mentor. We can't afford any drunkards on this team. Especially not you, Katniss," says Peeta to me. "What?" I sputter indignantly. It would be more convincing if I weren't still so hungover. "Last night's the only time I've ever even been drunk." "Yeah, and look at the

shape you're in," says Peeta. I don't know what I expected from my first meeting with Peeta after the announcement. A few hugs and kisses. A little comfort maybe. Not this. I turn to Haymitch. "Don't worry, I'll get you more liquor." "Then I'll turn you both in. Let you sober up in the stocks," says Peeta. "What's the

point to this?" asks Haymitch. "The point is that two of us are coming home from the Capitol. One mentor and one victor," says Peeta. "Effie's sending me recordings of all the living victors. We're going to watch their Games and learn everything we can about how they fight. We're going to put on weight and get strong. We're going to start acting like Careers. And one of us is going to be victor again whether you two like it or not!" He sweeps out of the room, slamming the front door. Haymitch and I wince at the bang. "I don't
like self-righteous people," I say. "What's to like?" says Haymitch, who begins sucking the dregs out of the empty bottles. "You and me. That's who he plans on coming home," I say. "Well, then the joke's on him," says Haymitch. But after a few days, we agree to act like Careers, because this is the best way to get Peeta ready as well. Every night we watch the old recaps of the Games that the remaining victors won. I realize we never met any of them on the Victory Tour, which seems odd in retrospect. When I bring it up, Haymitch says the last thing President Snow would've wanted was to show Peeta and me--especially me -- bonding with other victors in potentially rebellious districts. Victors have a special status, and if they appeared to be supporting my defiance of the Capitol, it would've been dangerous politically. Adjusting for age, I realize some of our opponents may be elderly, which is both sad and reassuring. Peeta takes copious notes,

Haymitch volunteers information about the victors' personalities, and slowly we begin to know our competition. Every morning we do exercises to strengthen our bodies. We run and lift things and stretch our muscles. Every afternoon we work on combat skills, throwing knives, fighting hand to hand; I even teach them to climb trees. Officially, tributes aren't supposed to train, but no one tries to stop us. Even in regular years, the tributes from Districts 1, 2, and 4 show up able to wield spears and swords. This is nothing by comparison. After all the years of abuse, Haymitch's body resists improvement. He's still remarkably strong, but the shortest run winds him. And you'd think a guy who sleeps every night with a knife might actually be able to hit the side of a house with one, but his hands shake so badly it takes weeks for him to achieve even that. Peeta and I excel under the new regimen, though. It gives me something to do. It
gives us all something to do besides accept defeat. My mother puts us on a special diet to gain weight. Prim treats our sore muscles. Madge sneaks us her father's Capitol newspapers. Predictions on who will be victor of the victors show us among the favorites. Even Gale steps into the picture on Sundays, although he's got no love for Peeta or Haymitch, and teaches us all he knows about snares. It's weird for me, being in conversations with both Peeta and Gale, but they seem to have set aside whatever issues they have about me.

One night, as I'm walking Gale back into town, he even admits, "It'd be better if he were easier to hate." "Tell me about it," I say. "If I could've just hated him in the arena, we all wouldn't be in this mess now. He'd be dead, and I'd be a happy little victor all by myself." "And where would we be,

Katniss?" asks Gale. I pause, not knowing what to say. Where would I be with my pretend cousin who wouldn't be my cousin if it weren't for Peeta? Would he have still kissed me and would I have kissed him back had I been free to do so? Would I have let myself open up to him, lulled by the security of money and food and the illusion of safety being a victor could bring under different circumstances? But there would still always be the reaping looming over us, over our children. No matter what I wanted ... "Hunting. Like every Sunday," I say. I know he didn't mean the question literally, but this is as much as I can honestly give. Gale knows I chose him over Peeta when I didn't make a run for it. To me, there's no point in talking about things that might have been. Even if I had killed Peeta in the arena, I still wouldn't have wanted to marry anyone. I only got engaged to save people's lives, and that completely backfired. I'm afraid, anyway, that any kind
of emotional scene with Gale might cause him to do something drastic. Like start that uprising in the mines. And as Haymitch says, District 12 isn't ready for that. If anything, they're less ready than before the Quarter Quell announcement, because the following morning another hundred Peacekeepers arrived on the train. Since I don't plan on making it back alive a second time, the sooner Gale lets me go, the better. I do plan on saying one or two things to him after the reaping, when we're allowed an hour for good-byes. To let Gale know how essential he's been to me all these years. How much better my life has been for knowing him. For loving him, even if it's only in the limited way that I can manage. But I never get the chance. The day of the reaping's hot and sultry. The population of District 12 waits, sweating and silent, in the square with machine guns trained on them. I stand alone in a small roped-off area with Peeta

and Haymitch in a similar pen to the right of me. The reaping takes only a minute. Effie, shining in a wig of metallic gold, lacks her usual verve. She has to claw around the girls' reaping ball for quite a while to snag the one piece of paper that everyone already knows has my name on it. Then she catches Haymitch's name. He barely has time to shoot me an unhappy look before Peeta has volunteered to take his place. We are immediately marched into the Justice Building to find Head Peacekeeper Thread waiting for us. "New procedure," he says with a smile. We're ushered out the back door, into a car, and taken to the train station. There are no cameras on the platform, no crowd to send us on our way. Haymitch and Effie appear, escorted by guards.

Peacekeepers hurry us all onto the train and slam the door. The wheels begin to turn. And I'm left staring out the
window, watching District 12 disappear, with all my good-byes still hanging on my lips. I remain at the window long after the woods have swallowed up the last glimpse of my home. This time I don't have even the slightest hope of return. Before my first Games, I promised Prim I would do everything I could to win, and now I've sworn to myself to do all I can to keep Peeta alive. I will never reverse this journey again. I'd actually figured out what I wanted my last words to my loved ones to be. How best to close and lock the doors and leave them sad but safely behind. And now the Capitol has stolen that as well. "We'll write letters, Katniss," says Peeta from behind me. "It will be better, anyway. Give them a piece of us to hold on to. Haymitch will deliver them for us if ... they need to be delivered." I nod and go straight to my room. I sit on the bed, knowing I will never write those letters. They will be like the speech I tried to write to

honor Rue and Thresh in District 11. Things seemed clear in my head and even when I talked before the crowd, but the words never came out of the pen right. Besides, they were meant to go with embraces and kisses and a stroke of Prim's hair, a caress of Gale's face, a squeeze of Madge's hand. They cannot be delivered with a wooden box containing my cold, stiff body. Too heartsick to cry, all I want is to curl up on the bed and sleep until we arrive in the Capitol tomorrow morning. But I have a mission. No, it's more than a mission. It's my dying wish. Keep Peeta alive. And as unlikely as it seems that I can achieve it in the face of the Capitol's anger, it's important that I be at the top of my game. This won't happen if I'm mourning for everyone I love back home. Let them go, I tell myself. Say good-bye and forget them. I do my best, thinking of them one by one, releasing them like birds from the protective cages inside me, locking the doors
against their return. By the time Effie knocks on my door to call me to dinner, I'm empty. But the lightness isn't entirely unwelcome. The meal's subdued. So subdued, in fact, that there are long periods of silence relieved only by the removal of old dishes and presentation of new ones. A cold soup of pureed vegetables. Fish cakes with creamy lime paste. Those little birds filled with orange sauce, with wild rice and watercress. Chocolate custard dotted with cherries. Peeta and Effie make occasional attempts at conversation that quickly die out. "I love your new hair, Effie," Peeta says. "Thank you. I had it especially done to match Katniss's pin. I was thinking we might get you a golden ankle band and maybe find Haymitch a gold bracelet or something so we could all look like a team," says Effie. Evidently, Effie doesn't know that my mockingjay pin is now a symbol used by the rebels. At least in District 8. In the Capitol,

the mockingjay is still a fun reminder of an especially exciting Hunger Games. What else could it be? Real rebels don't put a secret symbol on something as durable as jewelry. They put it on a wafer of bread that can be eaten in a second if necessary. "I think that's a great idea," says Peeta. "How about it, Haymitch?" "Yeah, whatever," says Haymitch. He's not drinking but I can tell he'd like to be. Effie had them take her own wine away when she saw the effort he was making, but he's in a miserable state. If he were the tribute, he would have owed Peeta nothing and could be as drunk as he liked. Now it's going to take all he's got to keep

Peeta alive in an arena full of his old friends, and he'll probably fail. "Maybe we could get you a wig, too," I say in an attempt at lightness. He just shoots me a look that says to leave him alone, and we all eat our custard in silence. "Shall
we watch the recap of the reapings?" says Effie, dabbing at the corners of her mouth with a white linen napkin. Peeta goes off to retrieve his notebook on the remaining living victors, and we gather in the compartment with the television to see who our competition will be in the arena. We are all in place as the anthem begins to play and the annual recap of the reaping ceremonies in the twelve districts begins. In the history of the Games, there have been seventy-five victors. Fifty-nine are still alive. I recognize many of their faces, either from seeing them as tributes or mentors at previous Games or from our recent viewing of the victors' tapes. Some are so old or wasted by illness, drugs, or drink that I can't place them. As one would expect, the pools of Career tributes from Districts 1, 2, and 4 are the largest. But every district has managed to scrape up at least one female and one male victor. The reapings go by quickly.

Peeta studiously puts stars by the names of the chosen tributes in his notebook. Haymitch watches, his face devoid of emotion, as friends of his step up to take the stage. Effie makes hushed, distressed comments like "Oh, not Cecelia" or "Well, Chaff never could stay out of a fight," and sighs frequently. For my part, I try to make some mental record of the other tributes, but like last year, only a few really stick in my head. There's the classically beautiful brother and sister from District 1 who were victors in consecutive years when I was little. Brutus, a volunteer from District 2, who must be at least forty and apparently can't wait to get back in the arena. Finnick, the handsome bronze-haired guy from District 4 who was crowned ten years ago at the age of fourteen. A hysterical young woman with flowing brown hair is also called from 4, but she's quickly replaced by a volunteer, an eighty-year-old woman who needs a cane to walk to the
stage. Then there's Johanna Mason, the only living female victor from 7, who won a few years back by pretending she was a weakling. The woman from 8 who Effie calls Cecelia, who looks about thirty, has to detach herself from the three kids who run up to cling to her. Chaff, a man from 11 who I know to be one of Haymitch's particular friends, is also in. I'm called. Then Haymitch. And Peeta volunteers. One of the announcers actually gets teary because it seems the odds will never be in our favor, we star-crossed lovers of District 12. Then she pulls herself together to say she bets that "these will be the best Games ever!" Haymitch leaves the compartment without a word, and Effie, after making a few unconnected comments about this tribute or that, bids us good night. I just sit there watching Peeta rip out the pages of

the victors who were not picked. "Why don't you get some sleep?" he says. Because I can't handle the nightmares. Not without you, I think. They are sure to be dreadful tonight. But I can hardly ask Peeta to come sleep with me. We've barely touched since that night Gale was whipped. "What are you going to do?" I ask. "Just review my notes awhile. Get a clear picture of what we're up against. But I'll go over it with you in the morning. Go to bed, Katniss," he says. So I go to bed and, sure enough, within a few hours I awake from a nightmare where that old woman from District 4 transforms into a large rodent and gnaws on my face. I know I was screaming, but no one comes. Not Peeta, not even one of the Capitol attendants. I pull on a robe to try to calm the gooseflesh crawling over my body. Staying in my compartment is impossible, so I decide to go find someone to make me tea or hot chocolate or anything. Maybe
Haymitch is still up. Surely he isn't asleep. I order warm milk, the most calming thing I can think of, from an attendant. Hearing voices from the television room, I go in and find Peeta. Beside him on the couch is the box Effie sent of tapes of the old Hunger Games. I recognize the episode in which Brutus became victor. Peeta rises and flips off the tape when he sees me. "Couldn't sleep?" "Not for long," I say. I pull the robe more securely around me as I remember the old woman transforming into the rodent. "Want to talk about it?" he asks. Sometimes that can help, but I just shake my head, feeling weak that people I haven't even fought yet already haunt me. When Peeta holds out his arms, I walk straight into them. It's the first time since they announced the Quarter Quell that he's offered me any sort of affection. He's been more like a very demanding trainer, always pushing, always insisting Haymitch and I run faster, eat more, know

our enemy better. Lover? Forget about that. He abandoned any pretense of even being my friend. I wrap my arms tightly around his neck before he can order me to do push-ups or something. Instead he pulls me in close and buries his face in my hair. Warmth radiates from the spot where his lips just touch my neck, slowly spreading through the rest of me. It feels so good, so impossibly good, that I know I will not be the first to let go. And why should I? I have said good-bye to Gale. I'll never see him again, that's for certain. Nothing I do now can hurt him. He won't see it or he'll think I am acting for the cameras. That, at least, is one weight off my shoulders. The arrival of the Capitol attendant with the warm milk is what breaks us apart. He sets a tray with a steaming ceramic jug and two mugs on a table. "I brought an extra cup," he says. "Thanks," I say. "And I added a touch of honey to the milk. For sweetness. And just a pinch
of spice," he adds. He looks at us like he wants to say more, then gives his head a slight shake and backs out of the room. "What's with

him?" I say. "I think he feels bad for us," says Peeta. "Right," I say, pouring the milk. "I mean it. I don't think the people in the Capitol are going to be all that happy about our going back in," says Peeta. "Or the other victors. They get attached to their champions." "I'm guessing they'll get over it once the blood starts flowing," I say flatly. Really, if there's one thing I don't have time for, it's worrying about how the Quarter Quell will affect the mood in the Capitol. "So, you're watching all the tapes again?" "Not really. Just sort of skipping around to see people's different fighting techniques," says Peeta. "Who's next?" I ask. "You pick," says Peeta, holding out the box. The tapes are marked with the

year of the Games and the name of the victor. I dig around and suddenly find one in my hand that we have not watched. The year of the Games is fifty. That would make it the second Quarter Quell. And the name of the victor is Haymitch Abernathy. "We never watched this one," I say. Peeta shakes his head. "No. I knew Haymitch didn't want to. The same way we didn't want to relive our own Games. And since we're all on the same team, I didn't think it mattered much." "Is the person who won in twenty-five in here?" I ask. "I don't think so. Whoever it was must be dead by now, and Effie only sent me victors we might have to face." Peeta weighs Haymitch's tape in his hand. "Why? You think we ought to watch it?" "It's the only Quell we have. We might pick up something valuable about how they work," I say. But I feel weird. It seems like some major invasion of Haymitch's privacy. I don't know why it should, since the whole thing
was public. But it does. I have to admit I'm also extremely curious. "We don't have to tell Haymitch we saw it." "Okay," Peeta agrees. He puts in the tape and I curl up next to him on the couch with my milk, which is really delicious with the honey and spices, and lose myself in the Fiftieth Hunger Games. After the anthem, they show President Snow drawing the envelope for the second Quarter Quell. He looks younger but just as repellent. He reads from the square of paper in the same onerous voice he used for ours, informing Panem that in honor of the Quarter Quell, there will be twice the number of tributes. The editors smash cut right into the reapings, where name after name after name is called. By the time we get to District 12, I'm completely overwhelmed by the sheer number of kids going to certain death. There's a woman, not Effie, calling the names in 12, but she still begins with "Ladies first!" She calls

out the name of a girl who's from the Seam, you can tell by the look of her, and then I hear the name "Maysilee Donner." "Oh!" I say. "She was my mother's friend." The camera finds her in the crowd, clinging to two other girls. All blond. All definitely merchants' kids. "I think that's your mother hugging her," says Peeta quietly. And he's right. As Maysilee Donner

bravely disengages herself and heads for the stage, I catch a glimpse of my mother at my age, and no one has exaggerated her beauty. Holding her hand and weeping is another girl who looks just like Maysilee. But a lot like someone else I know, too. "Madge," I say. "That's her mother. She and Maysilee were twins or something," Peeta says. "My dad mentioned it once." I think of Madge's mother. Mayor Undersee's wife. Who spends half her life in bed immobilized
with terrible pain, shutting out the world. I think of how I never realized that she and my mother shared this connection. Of Madge showing up in that snowstorm to bring the painkiller for Gale. Of my mockingjay pin and how it means something completely different now that I know that its former owner was Madge's aunt, Maysilee Donner, a tribute who was murdered in the arena. Haymitch's name is called last of all. It's more of a shock to see him than my mother. Young. Strong. Hard to admit, but he was something of a looker. His hair dark and curly, those gray Seam eyes bright and, even then, dangerous. "Oh. Peeta, you don't think he killed Maysilee, do you?" I burst out. I don't know why, but I can't stand the thought. "With forty-eight players? I'd say the odds are against it," says Peeta. The chariot rides -- in which the District 12 kids are dressed in awful coal miners' outfits -- and the interviews flash by. There's little time to

focus on anyone. But since Haymitch is going to be the victor, we get to see one full exchange between him and Caesar Flickerman, who looks exactly as he always does in his twinkling midnight blue suit. Only his dark green hair, eyelids, and lips are different. "So, Haymitch, what do you think of the Games having one hundred percent more competitors than usual?" asks Caesar. Haymitch shrugs. "I don't see that it makes much difference. They'll still be one hundred percent as stupid as usual, so I figure my odds will be roughly the same." The audience bursts out laughing and Haymitch gives them a half smile. Snarky. Arrogant. Indifferent. "He didn't have to reach far for that, did he?" I say. Now it's the morning the Games begin. We watch from the point of view of one of the tributes as she rises up through the tube from the Launch Room and into the arena. I can't help but give a slight gasp. Disbelief is reflected on the
faces of the players. Even Haymitch's eyebrows lift in pleasure, although they almost immediately knit themselves back into a scowl. It's the most breathtaking place imaginable. The golden Cornucopia sits in the middle of a green meadow with patches of gorgeous flowers. The sky is azure blue with puffy white clouds. Bright songbirds flutter overhead. By the way some of the tributes are sniffing, it must smell fantastic. An aerial shot shows that the meadow stretches for miles. Far in the distance, in one direction, there seems to be a woods, in the other, a snowcapped mountain. The beauty disorients

many of the players, because when the gong sounds, most of them seem like they're trying to wake from a dream. Not Haymitch, though. He's at the Cornucopia, armed with weapons and a backpack of choice supplies. He heads for the

woods before most of the others have stepped off their plates.

Eighteen tributes are killed in the bloodbath that first day. Others begin to die off and it becomes clear that almost everything in this pretty place--the luscious fruit dangling from the bushes, the water in the crystalline streams, even the scent of the flowers when inhaled too directly--is deadly poisonous. Only the rainwater and the food provided at the Cornucopia are safe to consume. There's also a large, well-stocked Career pack of ten tributes scouring the mountain area for victims. Haymitch has his own troubles over in the woods, where the fluffy golden squirrels turn out to be carnivorous and attack in packs, and the butterfly stings bring agony if not death. But he persists in moving forward, always keeping the distant mountain at his back.
Maysilee Donner turns out to be pretty resourceful herself, for a girl who leaves the Cornucopia with only a small backpack. Inside she finds a bowl, some dried beef, and a blowgun with two dozen darts. Making use of the readily available poisons, she soon turns the blowgun into a deadly weapon by dipping the darts in lethal substances and directing them into her opponents' flesh. Four days in, the picturesque mountain erupts in a volcano that wipes out another dozen players, including all but five of the Career pack. With the mountain spewing liquid fire, and the meadow offering no means of concealment, the remaining thirteen tributes -- including Haymitch and Maysilee -- have no choice but to confine themselves to the woods. Haymitch seems bent on continuing in the same direction, away from the now volcanic mountain, but a maze of tightly woven hedges forces him to circle back into the center of the

woods, where he encounters three of the Careers and pulls his knife. They may be much bigger and stronger, but Haymitch has remarkable speed and has killed two when the third disarms him. That Career is about to slit his throat when a dart drops him to the ground. Maysilee Donner steps out of the woods. "We'd live longer with two of us." "Guess you just proved that," says Haymitch, rubbing his neck. "Allies?" Maysilee nods. And there they are, instantly drawn into one of those pacts you'd be hard- pressed to break if you ever expect to go home and face your district. Just like Peeta and me, they do better together. Get more rest, work out a system to salvage more rainwater, fight as a team, and share the food from the dead tributes' packs. But Haymitch is still determined to keep moving on. "Why?" Maysilee keeps asking, and he ignores her until she refuses to move any farther without an answer. "Because it has to end
somewhere, right?" says Haymitch. "The arena can't go on forever." "What do you expect to find?" Maysilee asks. "I don't know. But maybe there's something we can use," he says. When they finally do make it through that impossible hedge, using a blowtorch from one of the dead Careers' packs, they find themselves on flat, dry earth that leads to a

cliff. Far below, you can see jagged rocks. "That's all there is, Haymitch. Let's go back," says Maysilee. "No, I'm staying here," he says. "All right. There's only five of us left. May as well say good-bye now, anyway," she says. "I don't want it to come down to you and me." "Okay," he agrees. That's all. He doesn't offer to shake her hand or even look at her. And she walks away. Haymitch skirts along the edge of the cliff as if trying to figure something out. His foot dislodges a pebble and it falls into the abyss, apparently

gone forever. But a minute later, as he sits to rest, the pebble shoots back up beside him. Haymitch stares at it, puzzled, and then his face takes on a strange intensity. He lobs a rock the size of his fist over the cliff and waits. When it flies back out and right into his hand, he starts laughing. That's when we hear Maysilee begin to scream. The alliance is over and she broke it off, so no one could blame him for ignoring her. But Haymitch runs for her, anyway. He arrives only in time to watch the last of a flock of candy pink birds, equipped with long, thin beaks, skewer her through the neck. He holds her hand while she dies, and all I can think of is Rue and how I was too late to save her, too. Later that day, another tribute is killed in combat and a third gets eaten by a pack of those fluffy squirrels, leaving Haymitch and a girl from District 1 to vie for the crown. She's bigger than he is and just as fast, and when the inevitable fight comes, it's
bloody and awful and both have received what could well be fatal wounds, when Haymitch is finally disarmed. He staggers through the beautiful woods, holding his intestines in, while she stumbles after him, carrying the ax that should deliver his deathblow. Haymitch makes a beeline for his cliff and has just reached the edge when she throws the ax. He collapses on the ground and it flies into the abyss. Now weaponless as well, the girl just stands there, trying to staunch the flow of blood pouring from her empty eye socket. She's thinking perhaps that she can outlast Haymitch, who's starting to convulse on the ground. But what she doesn't know, and what he does, is that the ax will return. And when it flies back over the ledge, it buries itself in her head. The cannon sounds, her body is removed, and the trumpets blow to announce Haymitch's victory. Peeta clicks off the tape and we sit there in silence for a while. Finally

Peeta says, "That force field at the bottom of the cliff, it was like the one on the roof of the Training Center. The one that throws you back if you try to jump off and commit suicide. Haymitch found a way to turn it into a weapon." "Not just against the other tributes, but the Capitol, too," I say. "You know they didn't expect that to happen. It wasn't meant to be part of the arena. They never planned on anyone using it as a weapon. It made them look stupid that he figured it out. I bet they had a good time trying to

spin that one. Bet that's why I don't remember seeing it on television. It's almost as bad as us and the berries!" I can't help laughing, really laughing, for the first time in months. Peeta just shakes his head like I've lost my mind--and maybe I have, a little. "Almost, but not quite," says Haymitch from behind us. I whip around, afraid he's going to be angry over
us watching his tape, but he just smirks and takes a swig from a bottle of wine. So much for sobriety. I guess I should be upset he's drinking again, but I'm preoccupied with another feeling. I've spent all these weeks getting to know who my competitors are, without even thinking about who my teammates are. Now a new kind of confidence is lighting up inside of me, because I think I finally know who Haymitch is. And I'm beginning to know who I am. And surely, two people who have caused the Capitol so much trouble can think of a way to get Peeta home alive. Having been through prep with Flavius, Venia, and Octavia numerous times, it should just be an old routine to survive. But I haven't anticipated the emotional ordeal that awaits me. At some point during the prep, each of them bursts into tears at least twice, and Octavia pretty much keeps up a running whimper throughout the morning. It turns out they

really have become attached to me, and the idea of my returning to the arena has undone them. Combine that with the fact that by losing me they'll be losing their ticket to all kinds of big social events, particularly my wedding, and the whole thing becomes unbearable. The idea of being strong for someone else having never entered their heads, I find myself in the position of having to console them. Since I'm the person going in to be slaughtered, this is somewhat annoying. It's interesting, though, when I think of what Peeta said about the attendant on the train being unhappy about the victors having to fight again. About people in the Capitol not liking it. I still think all of that will be forgotten once the gong sounds, but it's something of a revelation that those in the Capitol feel anything at all about us. They certainly don't have a problem watching children murdered every year. But maybe they know too much about the victors, especially the
ones who've been celebrities for ages, to forget we're human beings. It's more like watching your own friends die. More like the Games are for those of us in the districts. By the time Cinna shows up, I am irritable and exhausted from comforting the prep team, especially because their constant tears are reminding me of the ones undoubtedly being shed at home. Standing there in my thin robe with my stinging skin and heart, I know I can't bear even one more look of regret. So the moment he walks in the door I snap, "I swear if you cry, I'll kill you here and now." Cinna just smiles. "Had a damp morning?" "You could wring me out," I reply. Cinna puts his arm around my shoulder and leads me into lunch. "Don't worry. I

always channel my emotions into my work. That way I don't hurt anyone but myself." "I can't go through that again,"

I warn him. "I know. I'll talk to them," says Cinna. Lunch makes me feel a bit better. Pheasant with a selection of jewel-colored jellies, and tiny versions of real vegetables swimming in butter, and potatoes mashed with parsley. For dessert we dip chunks of fruit in a pot of melted chocolate, and Cinna has to order a second pot because I start just eating the stuff with a spoon. "So, what are we wearing for the opening ceremonies?" I finally ask as I scrape the second pot clean. "Headlamps or fire?" I know the chariot ride will require Peeta and me to be dressed in something coal related. "Something along that line," he says. When it's time to get in costume for the opening ceremonies, my prep team shows up but Cinna sends them away, saying they've done such a spectacular job in the morning, there's nothing left to do. They go off to recover, thankfully leaving me in Cinna's hands. He puts up my hair first, in the braided style my
mother introduced him to, then proceeds with my makeup. Last year he used little so that the audience would recognize me when I landed in the arena. But now my face is almost obscured by the dramatic highlights and dark shadows. High arching eyebrows, sharp cheekbones, smoldering eyes, deep purple lips. The costume looks deceptively simple at first, just a fitted black jumpsuit that covers me from the neck down. He places a half crown like the one I received as victor on my head, but it's made of a heavy black metal, not gold. Then he adjusts the light in the room to mimic twilight and presses a button just inside the fabric on my wrist. I look down, fascinated, as my ensemble slowly comes to life, first with a soft golden light but gradually transforming to the orange-red of burning coal. I look as if I have been coated in glowing embers -- no, that I am a glowing ember straight from our fireplace. The colors

rise and fall, shift and blend, in exactly the way the coals do. "How did you do this?" I say in wonder. "Portia and I spent a lot of hours watching fires," says Cinna. "Now look at yourself." He turns me toward a mirror so that I can take in the entire effect. I do not see a girl, or even a woman, but some unearthly being who looks like she might make her home in the volcano that destroyed so many in Haymitch's Quell. The black crown, which now appears red-hot, casts strange shadows on my dramatically made-up face. Katniss, the girl on fire, has left behind her flickering flames and bejeweled gowns and soft candlelight frocks. She is as deadly as fire itself. "I think ... this is just what I needed to face the others," I say. "Yes, I think your days of pink lipstick and ribbons are behind you," says Cinna. He touches the button on my wrist again, extinguishing my light. "Let's not run down your power pack. When you're on the chariot this
time, no waving, no smiling.

I just want you to look straight ahead, as if the entire audience is beneath your notice." "Finally something I'll be good at," I say. Cinna has a few more things to attend to, so I decide to head down to the ground floor of the Remake Center, which houses the huge gathering place for the tributes and their chariots before the opening ceremonies. I'm hoping to find Peeta and Haymitch, but they haven't arrived yet. Unlike last year, when all the tributes were practically glued to their chariots, the scene is very social. The victors, both this year's tributes and their mentors, are standing around in small groups, talking. Of course, they all know one another and I don't know anyone, and I'm not really the sort of person to go around introducing myself. So I just stroke the neck of one of my horses and try not to be

noticed. It doesn't work. The crunching hits my ear before I even know he's beside me, and when I turn my head, Finnick Odair's famous sea green eyes are only inches from mine. He pops a sugar cube in his mouth and leans against my horse.

"Hello, Katniss," he says, as if we've known each other for years, when in fact we've never met. "Hello, Finnick," I say, just as casually, although I'm feeling uncomfortable at his closeness, especially since he's got so much bare skin exposed. "Want a sugar cube?" he says, offering his hand, which is piled high. "They're supposed to be for the horses, but who cares? They've got years to eat sugar, whereas you and I ... well, if we see something sweet, we better grab it quick." Finnick Odair is something of a living legend in Panem. Since he won the Sixty-fifth Hunger Games when he was only fourteen, he's still one of the youngest victorsBeing from District 4, he was a Career, so the odds were already in his favor, but what no trainer could claim to have given him was his extraordinary beauty. Tall, athletic, with golden skin and bronze-colored hair and those incredible eyes. While other tributes that year were hard-pressed to get a handful of grain or some matches for a gift, Finnick never wanted for anything, not food or medicine or weapons. It took about a week for his competitors to realize that he was the one to kill, but it was too late. He was already a good fighter with the spears and knives he had found in the Cornucopia. When he received a silver parachute with a trident--which may be the most expensive gift I've ever seen given in the arena--it was all over. District 4's industry is fishing. He'd been on boats his whole life. The trident was a natural, deadly extension of his arm. He wove a net out of some kind of vine he found, used it to entangle his opponents

so he could spear them with the trident, and within a matter of days the crown was his. The citizens of the Capitol have been drooling over him ever since. Because of his youth, they couldn't really touch him for the first year or two. But ever since he turned sixteen, he's spent his time at the Games being dogged by those desperately in love with him. No one retains his favor for long. He can go through four or five in his annual visit. Old or young, lovely or plain, rich or very rich, he'll keep them company and take their extravagant gifts, but he never stays, and once he's gone he never comes back. I can't argue that Finnick isn't one of the most stunning, sensuous people on the planet. But I can honestly say he's never been attractive to me. Maybe he's too pretty, or maybe he's too easy to get, or maybe it's really that he'd just be too easy to lose. "No, thanks," I say to the sugar. "I'd love to borrow your outfit sometime, though."
He's draped in a golden net that's strategically knotted at his groin so that he can't technically be called naked, but he's about as close as you can get. I'm sure his stylist thinks the more of Finnick the audience sees, the better. "You're absolutely terrifying me in that getup. What happened to the pretty little-girl dresses?" he asks. He wets his lips just ever so slightly with his tongue. Probably this

drives most people crazy. But for some reason all I can think of is old Cray, salivating over some poor, starving young woman. "I outgrew them," I say. Finnick takes the collar of my outfit and runs it between his fingers. "It's too bad about this Quell thing. You could have made out like a bandit in the Capitol. Jewels, money, anything you wanted." "I don't like jewels, and I have more money than I need. What do you spend all yours on, anyway, Finnick?" I say.

"Oh, I haven't dealt in anything as common as money for years," says Finnick. "Then how do they pay you for the pleasure of your company?" I ask. "With secrets," he says softly. He tips his head in so his lips are almost in contact with mine. "What about you, girl on fire? Do you have any secrets worth my time?" For some stupid reason, I blush, but I force myself to hold my ground. "No, I'm an open book," I whisper back. "Everybody seems to know my secrets before I know them myself." He smiles. "Unfortunately, I think that's true." His eyes flicker off to the side. "Peeta is coming. Sorry you have to cancel your wedding. I know how devastating that must be for you." He tosses another sugar cube in his mouth and saunters off. Peeta's beside me, dressed in an outfit identical to mine. "What did Finnick Odair want?" he asks. I turn and put my lips close to Peeta's and drop my eyelids in imitation of Finnick. "He offered me sugar and
wanted to know all my secrets," I say in my best seductive voice. Peeta laughs. "Ugh. Not really." "Really," I say. "I'll tell you more when my skin stops crawling." "Do you think we'd have ended up like this if only one of us had won?" he asks, glancing around at the other victors. "Just another part of the freak show?" "Sure. Especially you," I say. "Oh. And why especially me?" he says with a smile. "Because you have a weakness for beautiful things and I don't," I say with an air of superiority. "They would lure you into their Capitol ways and you'd be lost entirely." "Having an eye for beauty isn't the same thing as a weakness," Peeta points out. "Except possibly when it comes to you." The music is beginning and I see the wide doors opening for the first chariot, hear the roar of the crowd. "Shall we?" He holds out a hand to help me into the chariot. I climb up and pull him up after me. "Hold still," I say, and straighten his crown. "Have you seen your suit

turned on? We're going to be fabulous again." "Absolutely. But Portia says we're to be very above it all. No waving or anything," he says. "Where are they, anyway?" "I don't know." I eye the procession of chariots. "Maybe we better go ahead and switch ourselves on." We do, and as we begin to glow, I can see people pointing at us and chattering, and I know that, once again, we'll be the talk of the opening ceremonies. We're almost at the door. I crane my head around, but neither Portia nor Cinna, who were with us right up to the final second last year,

are anywhere in sight. "Are we supposed to hold hands this year?" I ask. "I guess they've left it up to us," says Peeta. I look up into those blue eyes that no amount of dramatic makeup can make truly deadly and remember how, just a year ago, I was prepared to kill him. Convinced he was trying
to kill me. Now everything is reversed. I'm determined to keep him alive, knowing the cost will be my own life, but the part of me that is not so brave as I could wish is glad that it's Peeta, not Haymitch, beside me. Our hands find each other without further discussion. Of course we will go into this as one. The voice of the crowd rises into one universal scream as we roll into the fading evening light, but neither one of us reacts. I simply fix my eyes on a point far in the distance and pretend there is no audience, no hysteria. I can't help catching glimpses of us on the huge screens along the route, and we are not just beautiful, we are dark and powerful. No, more. We star-crossed lovers from District 12, who suffered so much and enjoyed so little the rewards of our victory, do not seek the fans' favor, grace them with our smiles, or catch their kisses. We are unforgiving. And I love it. Getting to be myself at last. As we curve around into the

loop of the City Circle, I can see that a couple of the other stylists have tried to steal Cinna and Portia's idea of illuminating their tributes. The electric-light-studded outfits from District 3, where they make electronics, at least make sense. But what are the livestock keepers from District 10, who are dressed as cows, doing with flaming belts? Broiling themselves? Pathetic. Peeta and I, on the other hand, are so mesmerizing with our ever-changing coal costumes that most of the other tributes are staring at us. We seem particularly riveting to the pair from District 6, who are known morphling addicts. Both bone thin, with sagging yellowish skin. They can't tear their overlarge eyes away, even when President Snow begins to speak from his balcony, welcoming us all to the Quell. The anthem plays, and as we make our final trip around the circle, am I wrong? Or do I see the president fixated on me as well? Peeta and I wait until the
doors of the Training Center have closed behind us to relax. Cinna and Portia are there, pleased with our performance, and Haymitch has made an appearance this year as well, only he's not at our chariot, he's over with the tributes of District 11. I see him nod in our direction and then they follow him over to greet us. I know Chaff by sight because I've spent years watching him pass a bottle back and forth with Haymitch on television. He's dark skinned, about six feet tall, and one of his arms ends in a stump because he lost his hand in the Games he won thirty years ago. I'm sure they offered him some artificial replacement, like they did Peeta when they had to amputate his lower leg, but I guess he didn't take it. The woman, Seeder, looks almost like

she could be from the Seam, with her olive skin and straight black hair streaked with silver. Only her golden

brown eyes mark her as from another district. She must be around sixty, but she still looks strong, and there's no sign she's turned to liquor or morphling or any other chemical form of escape over the years. Before either of us says a word, she embraces me. I know somehow it must be because of Rue and Thresh. Before I can stop myself, I whisper, "The families?" "They're alive," she says back softly before letting me go. Chaff throws his good arm around me and gives me a big kiss right on the mouth. I jerk back, startled, while he and Haymitch guffaw. That's about all the time we get before the Capitol attendants are firmly directing us toward the elevators. I get the distinct feeling they're not comfortable with the camaraderie among the victors, who couldn't seem to care less. As I walk toward the elevators, my hand still linked with Peeta's, someone else rustles up to my side. The girl pulls off a headdress of leafy branches and
tosses it behind her without bothering to look where it falls. Johanna Mason. From District 7 Lumber and paper, thus the tree. She won by very convincingly portraying herself as weak and helpless so that she would be ignored. Then she demonstrated a wicked ability to murder. She ruffles up her spiky hair and rolls her wide-set brown eyes. "Isn't my costume awful? My stylist's the biggest idiot in the Capitol. Our tributes have been trees for forty years under her. Wish I'd gotten Cinna. You look fantastic." Girl talk. That thing I've always been so bad at. Opinions on clothes, hair, makeup. So I lie. "Yeah, he's been helping me design my own clothing line. You should see what he can do with velvet." Velvet. The only fabric. I could think of off the top of my head. "I have. On your tour. That strapless number you wore in District Two? The deep blue one with the diamonds? So gorgeous I wanted to reach through the screen and tear it

right off your back," says Johanna. I bet you did, I think. With a few inches of my flesh. While we wait for the elevators, Johanna unzips the rest of her tree, letting it drop to the floor, and then kicks it away in disgust. Except for her forest green slippers, she doesn't have on a stitch of clothing. "That's better." We end up on the same elevator with her, and she spends the whole ride to the seventh floor chatting to Peeta about his paintings while the light of his still-glowing costume reflects off her bare breasts. When she leaves, I ignore him, but I just know he's grinning. I toss aside his hand as the doors close behind Chaff and Seeder, leaving us alone, and he breaks out laughing. "What?" I say, turning on him as we step out on our floor. "It's you, Katniss. Can't you see?" he says. "What's me?" I say. "Why they're all acting like this. Finnick with his sugar cubes and Chaff kissing you and that whole thing with Johanna stripping down."He tries to take on a more serious tone, unsuccessfully. "They're playing with you because you're so ... you know." "No, I don't know," I say. And I really have no idea what he's talking about. "It's like when you wouldn't look at me naked in the arena even though I was half dead. You're so ... pure," he says finally. "I am not!" I say. "I've been practically ripping your clothes off every time there's been a camera for the last year!"

"Yeah, but ... I mean, for the Capitol, you're pure," he says, clearly trying to mollify me. "For me, you're perfect. They're just teasing you." "No, they're laughing at me, and so are you!" I say. "No." Peeta shakes his head, but he's still suppressing a smile. I'm seriously rethinking the question of who should get out of these Games alive when the other elevator opens. Haymitch and Effie join us, looking pleased

about something. Then Haymitch's face grows hard. What did I do now? I almost say, but I see he's staring behind me at the entrance to the dining room. Effie blinks in the same direction, then says brightly, "Looks like they've got you a matched set this year." I turn around and find the redheaded Avox girl who tended to me last year until the Games began. I think how nice it is to have a friend here. I notice that the young man beside her, another Avox, also has red hair. That must be what Effie meant by a matched set. Then a chill runs through me. Because I know him, too. Not from the Capitol but from years of having easy conversations in the Hob, joking over Greasy Sae's soup, and that last day watching him lie unconscious in the square while the life bled out of Gale. Our new Avox is Darius. Haymitch grips my wrist as if anticipating my next move, but I am as speechless as the Capitol's torturers have
rendered Darius. Haymitch once told me they did something to Avoxes' tongues so they could never talk again. In my head I hear Darius's voice, playful and bright, ringing across the Hob to tease me. Not as my fellow victors make fun of me now, but because we genuinely liked each other. If Gale could see him ... I know any move I would make toward Darius, any act of recognition, would only result in punishment for him. So we just stare into each other's eyes. Darius, now a mute slave; me, now headed to death. What would we say, anyway? That we're sorry for the other's lot? That we ache for the other's pain? That we're glad we had the chance to know each other? No, Darius shouldn't be glad he knew me. If I had been there to stop Thread, he wouldn't have stepped forward to save Gale. Wouldn't be an Avox. And more specifically, wouldn't be my Avox, because President Snow has so obviously had him placed here for my

benefit. I twist my wrist from Haymitch's grasp and head down to my old bedroom, locking the door behind me. I sit on the side of my bed, elbows on my knees, forehead on my fists, and watch my glowing suit in the darkness, imagining I am in my old home in District 12, huddled beside the fire. It slowly fades back to black as the power pack dies out. When Effie eventually knocks on the door to summon me to dinner, I get up and take off my suit, fold it neatly, and set it on the table with my crown. In the bathroom, I wash the dark streaks of makeup from my face. I dress in a simple shirt and pants and go down the hall to the dining room. I'm not aware of much at dinner except that

Darius and the redheaded Avox girl are our servers. Effie, Haymitch, Cinna, Portia, and Peeta are all there, talking about the opening ceremonies, I suppose. But the only time
I really feel present is when I purposely knock a dish of peas to the floor and, before anyone can stop me, crouch down to clean them up. Darius is right by me when I send the dish over, and we two are briefly side by side, obscured from view, as we scoop up the peas. For just one moment our hands meet. I can feel his skin, rough under the buttery sauce from the dish. In the tight, desperate clench of our fingers are all the words we will never be able to say. Then Effie's clucking at me from behind about how "That isn't your job, Katniss!" and he lets go. When we go in to watch the recap of the opening ceremonies, I wedge myself in between Cinna and Haymitch on the couch because I don't want to be next to Peeta. This awfulness with Darius belongs to me and Gale and maybe even Haymitch, but not to Peeta. He might've known Darius to nod hello, but Peeta wasn't Hob the way the rest of us were. Besides, I'm still angry with him for

laughing at me along with the other victors, and the last thing I want is his sympathy and comfort. I haven't changed my mind about saving him in the arena, but I don't owe him more than that. As I watch the procession to the City Circle, I think how it's bad enough that they dress us all up in costumes and parade us through the streets in chariots on a regular year. Kids in costumes are silly, but aging victors, it turns out, are pitiful. A few who are on the younger side, like Johanna and Finnick, or whose bodies haven't fallen into disrepair, like Seeder and Brutus, can still manage to maintain a little dignity. But the majority, who are in the clutches of drink or morphling or illness, look grotesque in their costumes, depicting cows and trees and loaves of bread. Last year we chattered away about each contestant, but tonight there's only the occasional comment. Small wonder the crowd goes wild when Peeta and I appear,
looking so young and strong and beautiful in our brilliant costumes. The very image of what tributes should be. As soon as it's over, I stand up and thank Cinna and Portia for their amazing work and head off to bed. Effie calls a reminder to meet early for breakfast to work out our training strategy, but even her voice sounds hollow. Poor Effie. She finally had a decent year in the Games with Peeta and me, and now it's all broken down into a mess that even she can't put a positive spin on. In Capitol terms, I'm guessing this counts as a true tragedy. Soon after I go to bed, there's a quiet knock on my door, but I ignore it. I don't want Peeta tonight. Especially not with Darius around. It's almost as bad as if Gale were here. Gale. How am I supposed to let him go with Darius haunting the hallways? Tongues figure prominently in my nightmares. First I watch frozen and helpless while gloved hands carry out the bloody

dissection in Darius's mouth. Then I'm at a party where everyone wears masks and someone with a flicking, wet tongue, who I suppose is Finnick, stalks me, but when he catches me and pulls off his mask, it's President Snow, and his puffy lips are dripping in bloody saliva. Finally I'm back in the arena, my own tongue as dry as sandpaper, while I try to reach a pool of water that recedes every time I'm about to touch it. When I wake, I stumble to the bathroom and gulp water from the faucet until I can hold no more. I strip off my sweaty clothes and fall back into bed, naked, and somehow find sleep again. I delay going down to breakfast as long as possible the next morning because I really don't want to discuss our training strategy. What's to discuss? Every victor already knows what everybody else can do. Or used to be able to do, anyway. So Peeta and I will continue to act in love and that's that. Somehow I'm just not up to talking
about it, especially with Darius standing mutely by. I take a long shower, dress slowly in the outfit Cinna has left for training, and order food from the menu in my room by speaking into a mouthpiece. In a minute, sausage, eggs, potatoes, bread, juice, and hot chocolate appear. I eat my fill, trying to drag out the minutes until ten o'clock, when we have to go down to the Training Center. By nine-thirty, Haymitch is pounding on my door, obviously fed up with me, ordering me to the dining room NOW! Still, I brush my teeth before meandering down the hall, effectively killing another five minutes. The dining room's empty except for Peeta and Haymitch, whose face is flushed with drink and anger. On his wrist he wears a solid-gold bangle with a pattern of flames -- this must be his concession to Effie's matching-token plan -- that he twists unhappily. It's a very handsome bangle, really, but the movement makes it seem

like something confining, a shackle, rather than a piece of jewelry. "You're late," he snarls at me. "Sorry. I slept in after the mutilated-tongue nightmares kept me up half the night." I mean to sound hostile, but my voice catches at the end of the sentence. Haymitch gives me a scowl, then relents. "All right, never mind. Today, in training, you've got two jobs. One, stay in love." "Obviously," I say. "And two, make some friends," says Haymitch. "No," I say. "I don't trust any of them, I can't stand most of them, and I'd rather operate with just the two of us." "That's what I said at first, but--" Peeta begins. "But it won't be enough," Haymitch insists. "You're going to need more allies this time around." "Why?" I ask. "Because you're at a distinct disadvantage. Your competitors have known each other for years. So who do you think they're going to target first?" he says. "Us. And nothing we're going to do is going to override any old
friendship," I say. "So why bother?" "Because you can fight. You're popular with the crowd. That could still make you desirable allies. But

only if you let the others know you're willing to team up with them," says Haymitch. "You mean you want us in the Career pack this year?" I ask, unable to hide my distaste. Traditionally the tributes from Districts 1, 2, and 4 join forces, possibly taking in a few other exceptional fighters, and hunt down the weaker competitors. "That's been our strategy, hasn't it? To train like Careers?" counters Haymitch. "And who makes up the Career pack is generally agreed upon before the Games begin. Peeta barely got in with them last year." I think of the loathing I felt when I discovered Peeta was with the Careers during the last Games. "So we're to try to get in with Finnick and Brutus -- is that what you're

saying?" "Not necessarily. Everyone's a victor. Make your own pack if you'd rather. Choose who you like. I'd suggest Chaff and Seeder. Although Finnick's not to be ignored," says Haymitch. "Find someone to team up with who might be of some use to you. Remember, you're not in a ring full of trembling children anymore. These people are all experienced killers, no matter what shape they appear to be in." Maybe he's right. Only who could I trust? Seeder maybe. But do I really want to make a pact with her, only to possibly have to kill her later? No. Still, I made a pact with Rue under the same circumstances. I tell Haymitch I'll try, even though I think I'll be pretty bad at the whole thing. Effie shows up a bit early to take us down because last year, even though we were on time, we were the last two tributes to show up. But Haymitch tells her he doesn't want her taking us down to the gym. None of the other victors will be showing up with a
babysitter, and being the youngest, it's even more important we look self-reliant. So she has to satisfy herself with taking us to the elevator, fussing over our hair, and pushing the button for us. It's such a short ride that there's no real time for conversation, but when Peeta takes my hand, I don't pull it away. I may have ignored him last night in private, but in training we must appear as an inseparable team. Effie needn't have worried about us being the last to arrive. Only Brutus and the woman from District 2, Enobaria, are present. Enobaria looks to be about thirty and all I can remember about her is that, in hand-to-hand combat, she killed one tribute by ripping open his throat with her teeth. She became so famous for this act that, after she was a victor, she had her teeth cosmetically altered so each one ends in a sharp point like a fang and is inlaid with gold. She has no shortage of admirers in the Capitol. By ten o'clock,

only about half of the tributes have shown up. Atala, the woman who runs training, begins her spiel right on time, unfazed by the poor attendance. Maybe she expected it. I'm sort of relieved, because that means there are a dozen people I don't have to pretend to make friends with. Atala runs through the list of stations, which include both combat and

survival skills, and releases us to train. I tell Peeta I think we'd do best to split up, thus covering more territory. When he goes off to chuck spears with Brutus and Chaff, I head over to the knot-tying station, hardly anyone ever bothers to visit it. I like the trainer and he remembers me fondly, maybe because I spent time with him last year. He's pleased when I show him I can still set the trap that leaves an enemy dangling by a leg from a tree. Clearly he took note of
my snares in the arena last year and now sees me as an advanced pupil, so I ask him to review every kind of knot that might come in handy and a few that I'll probably never use. I'd be content to spend the morning alone with him, but after about an hour and a half, someone puts his arms around me from behind, his fingers easily finishing the complicated knot I've been sweating over. Of course it's Finnick, who seems to have spent his childhood doing nothing but wielding tridents and manipulating ropes into fancy knots for nets, I guess. I watch for a minute while he picks up a length of rope, makes a noose, and then pretends to hang himself for my amusement. Rolling my eyes, I head over to another vacant station where tributes can learn to build fires. I already make excellent fires, but I'm still pretty dependent on matches

for starting them. So the trainer has me work with flint, steel, and some charred cloth. This is much harder than it looks, and even working as intently as I can, it takes me about an hour to get a fire going. I look up with a triumphant smile only to find I have company. The two tributes from District 3 are beside me, struggling to start a decent fire with matches. I think about leaving, but I really want to try using the flint again, and if I have to report back to Haymitch that I tried to make friends, these two might be a bearable choice. Both are small in stature with ashen skin and black hair. The woman, Wiress, is probably around my mother's age and speaks in a quiet, intelligent voice. But right away I notice she has a habit of dropping off her words in mid- sentence, as if she's forgotten you're there. Beetee, the man, is older and somewhat fidgety. He wears glasses but spends a lot of time looking under them. They're a little strange, but I'm pretty
sure neither of them is going to try to make me uncomfortable by stripping naked. And they're from District 3. Maybe they can even confirm my suspicions of an uprising there. I glance around the Training Center. Peeta is at the center of a ribald circle of knife throwers. The morphlings from District 6 are in the camouflage station, painting each other's faces with bright pink swirls. The male tribute from District 5 is vomiting wine on the sword-fighting floor. Finnick and the old woman from his district are using the archery station. Johanna Mason is naked again and oiling her skin down for a wrestling lesson. I decide to stay put. Wiress and Beetee make decent company. They seem friendly enough but don't pry. We talk about our talents; they tell me they both invent things, which makes my supposed interest in fashion seem pretty weak. Wiress brings up some sort of stitching device she's working on. "It senses

the density of the fabric and selects the strength," she says, and then becomes absorbed in a bit of dry straw before she can go on. "The strength of the thread," Beetee finishes explaining. "Automatically. It rules out human error." Then he talks about his recent success creating a musical chip that's tiny enough to be concealed in a flake of glitter but can hold hours of songs. I remember Octavia talking about this during the wedding shoot, and I see a possible chance to allude to the uprising. "Oh, yeah. My prep team was all upset a few months ago, I think, because they couldn't get hold of that," I say casually. "I guess a lot of orders from District Three were getting backed up." Beetee examines me under his glasses. "Yes. Did you have any similar backups in coal production, this year?" he asks. "No. Well, we lost a couple of weeks when they brought in a new Head Peacekeeper and his crew, but nothing major," I say. "To production, I mean. Two
weeks sitting around your house doing nothing just means two weeks of being hungry for most people." I think

they understand what I'm trying to say. That we've had no uprising. "Oh. That's a shame," says Wiress in a slightly disappointed voice. "I found your district very ..." She trails off, distracted by something in her head. "Interesting," fills in Beetee. "We both did." I feel bad, knowing that their district must have suffered much worse than ours. I feel I have to defend my people. "Well, there aren't very many of us in Twelve," I say. "Not that you'd know it nowadays by the size of the Peacekeeping force. But I guess we're interesting enough." As we move over to the shelter station, Wiress stops and gazes up at the stands where the Gamemakers are roaming around, eating and drinking, sometimes taking notice of us. "Look," she says, giving her head a slight nod in

their direction. I look up and see Plutarch Heavensbee in the magnificent purple robe with the fur-trimmed collar that designates him as Head Gamemaker. He's eating a turkey leg. I don't see why this merits comment, but I say, "Yes, he's been promoted to Head Gamemaker this year." "No, no. There by the corner of the table. You can just ..." says Wiress. Beetee squints under his glasses. "Just make it out." I stare in that direction, perplexed. But then I see it. A patch of space about six inches square at the corner of the table seems almost to be vibrating. It's as if the air is rippling in tiny visible waves, distorting the sharp edges of the wood and a goblet of wine someone has set there. "A force field. They've set one up between the Game-makers and us. I wonder what brought that on," Beetee says. "Me, probably," I confess. "Last year I shot an arrow at them during my private training session." Beetee and Wiress look at me
curiously. "I was provoked. So, do all force fields have a spot like that?" "Chink," says Wiress vaguely. "In the armor, as it were," finishes Beetee. "Ideally it'd be invisible, wouldn't it?" I want to ask them more, but lunch is announced. I look for Peeta, but he's hanging with a group of about ten other victors, so I decide just to eat with District 3. Maybe I can get Seeder to join us. When we make our way into the dining area, I see some of Peeta's gang have other ideas. They're dragging all the smaller tables to form one large table so that we all have to eat together. Now I don't know what to do. Even at school I used to avoid eating at a crowded table. Frankly, I'd probably have sat alone if Madge hadn't made a habit of joining me. I guess I'd have eaten with Gale except, being two grades apart, our lunch never fell at the same time. I take a tray and start making my way around the food-laden carts that ring the room. Peeta catches up with

me at the stew. "How's it going?" "Good. Fine. I like the District Three victors," I say. "Wiress and Beetee." "Really?" he asks. "They're something of a joke to the others." "Why does that not surprise me?" I say. I think of how Peeta was always surrounded at school

by a crowd of friends. It's amazing, really, that he ever took any notice of me except to think I was odd. "Johanna's nicknamed them Nuts and Volts," he says. "I think she's Nuts and he's Volts." "And so I'm stupid for thinking they might be useful. Because of something Johanna Mason said while she was oiling up her breasts for wrestling," I retort. "Actually I think the nickname's been around for years. And I didn't mean that as an insult. I'm just sharing information," he says. "Well, Wiress and Beetee are smart. They invent things. They could tell by sight that a force field had been put up between
us and the Gamemakers. And if we have to have allies, I want them." I toss the ladle back in a pot of stew, splattering us both with the gravy. "What are you so angry about?" Peeta asks, wiping the gravy from his shirtfront. "Because I teased you on the elevator? I'm sorry. I thought you would just laugh about it." "Forget it," I say with a shake of my head. "It's a lot of things." "Darius," he says. "Darius. The Games. Haymitch making us team up with the others," I say. "It can just be you and me, you know," he says. "I know. But maybe Haymitch is right," I say. "Don't tell him I said so, but he usually is, where the Games are concerned." "Well, you can have final say about our allies. But right now, I'm leaning toward Chaff and Seeder," says Peeta. "I'm okay with Seeder, not Chaff," I say. "Not yet, anyway." "Come on and eat with him. I promise, I won't let him kiss you again," says Peeta. Chaff doesn't seem as bad at lunch. He's sober, and

while he talks too loud and makes bad jokes a lot, most of them are at his own expense. I can see why he would be good for Haymitch, whose thoughts run so darkly. But I'm still not sure I'm ready to team up with him. I try hard to be more sociable, not just with Chaff but with the group at large. After lunch I do the edible-insect station with the District 8 tributes -- Cecelia, who's got three kids at home, and Woof, a really old guy who's hard of hearing and doesn't seem to know what's going on since he keeps trying to stuff poisonous bugs in his mouth. I wish I could mention meeting Twill and Bonnie in the woods, but I can't figure out how. Cashmere and Gloss, the sister and brother from District 1, invite me over and we make hammocks for a while. They're polite but cool, and I spend the whole time thinking about how I killed both the tributes from their district, Glimmer and Marvel, last year, and that they probably knew them and might even
have been their mentors. Both my hammock and my attempt to connect with them are mediocre at best. I join Enobaria at sword training and exchange a few comments, but it's clear neither of us wants to team up. Finnick appears again when I'm picking up fishing tips, but mostly just to introduce me to Mags, the elderly woman who's also from District 4. Between her district accent and her garbled speech -- possibly she's had a

stroke -- I can't make out more than one in four words. But I swear she can make a decent fishhook out of anything--a thorn, a wishbone, an earring. After a while I tune out the trainer and simply try to copy whatever Mags does. When I make a pretty good hook out of a bent nail and fasten it to some strands of my hair, she gives me a toothless smile and an unintelligible comment I think might be praise.

Suddenly I remember how she volunteered to replace the young, hysterical woman in her district. It couldn't be because she thought she had any chance of winning. She did it to save the girl, just like I volunteered last year to save Prim. And I decide I want her on my team. Great. Now I have to go back and tell Haymitch I want an eighty-year-old and Nuts and Volts for my allies. He'll love that. So I give up trying to make friends and go over to the archery range for some sanity. It's wonderful there, getting to try out all the different bows and arrows. The trainer, Tax, seeing that the standing targets offer no challenge for me, begins to launch these silly fake birds high into the air for me to hit. At first it seems stupid, but it turns out to be kind of fun. Much more like hunting a moving creature. Since I'm hitting everything he throws up, he starts increasing the number of birds he sends airborne. I forget the rest of the gym and the victors
and how miserable I am and lose myself in the shooting. When I manage to take down five birds in one round, I realize it's so quiet I can hear each one hit the floor. I turn and see the majority of the victors have stopped to watch me. Their faces show everything from envy to hatred to admiration. After training, Peeta and I hang out, waiting for Haymitch and Effie to show up for dinner. When we're called to eat, Haymitch pounces on me immediately. "So at least half the victors have instructed their mentors to request you as an ally. I know it can't be your sunny personality." "They saw her shoot," says Peeta with a smile. "Actually, I saw her shoot, for real, for the first time. I'm about to put in a formal request myself." "You're that good?" Haymitch asks me. "So good that Brutus wants you?" I shrug. "But I don't want Brutus. I want Mags and District Three." "Of course you do." Haymitch sighs and orders a bottle of wine.

"I'll tell everybody you're still making up your mind." After my shooting exhibition, I still get teased some, but I no longer feel like I'm being mocked. In fact, I feel as if I've somehow been initiated into the victors' circle. During the next two days, I spend time with almost everybody headed for the arena. Even the morphlings, who, with Peeta's help, paint me into a field of yellow flowers. Even Finnick, who gives me an hour of trident lessons in exchange for an hour of archery instruction. And the more I come to know these people, the worse it is. Because, on the whole, I don't hate them. And some I like. And a lot of them are so damaged that my

natural instinct would be to protect them. But all of them must die if I'm to save Peeta. The final day of training ends with our private sessions. We each get fifteen minutes
before the Gamemakers to amaze them with our skills, but I don't know what any of us might have to show them. There's a lot of kidding about it at lunch. What we might do. Sing, dance, strip, tell jokes. Mags, who I can understand a little better now, decides she's just going to take a nap. I don't know what I'm going to do. Shoot some arrows, I guess. Haymitch said to surprise them if we could, but I'm fresh out of ideas. As the girl from 12, I'm scheduled to go last. The dining room gets quieter and quieter as the tributes file out to go perform. It's easier to keep up the irreverent,

invincible manner we've all adopted when there are more of us. As people disappear through the door, all I can think is that they have a matter of days to live. Peeta and I are finally left alone. He reaches across the table to take my hands. "Decided what to do for the Gamemakers yet?" I shake

my head. "I can't really use them for target practice this year, with the force field up and all. Maybe make some fishhooks. What about you?" "Not a clue. I keep wishing I could bake a cake or something," he says. "Do some more camouflage," I suggest. "If the morphlings have left me anything to work with," he says wryly. "They've been glued to that station since training started." We sit in silence awhile and then I blurt out the thing that's on both our minds. "How are we going to kill these people, Peeta?" "I don't know." He leans his forehead down on our entwined hands. "I don't want them as allies. Why did Haymitch want us to get to know them?" I say. "It'll make it so much harder than last time. Except for Rue maybe. But I guess I never really could've killed her, anyway. She was just too much like Prim." Peeta looks up at me, his brow creased in thought. "Her death was the most despicable, wasn't it?" "None of them
were very pretty," I say, thinking of Glimmer's and Cato's ends. They call Peeta, so I wait by myself. Fifteen minutes pass. Then half an hour. It's close to forty minutes before I'm called. When I go in, I smell the sharp odor of cleaner and notice that one of the mats has been dragged to the center of the room. The mood is very different from last year's, when the Gamemakers were half drunk and distractedly picking at tidbits from the banquet table. They whisper among themselves, looking somewhat annoyed. What did Peeta do? Something to upset them? I feel a pang of worry. That isn't good. I don't want Peeta singling himself out as a target for the Gamemakers' anger. That's part of my job. To draw fire away from Peeta. But how did he upset them? Because I'd love to do just that and more. To break through the smug veneer of those who use their brains to find amusing ways to kill us. To make them realize that while

we're vulnerable to the Capitol's cruelties, they are as well. Do you have any idea how much I hate you? I think. You, who have given your talents to the Games? I try to catch Plutarch Heavensbee's eye, but he seems to be intentionally ignoring me, as he has the entire training period. I remember how he sought me out for a dance, how pleased he was to show me the mockingjay on his watch. His friendly manner has no place here. How could it, when I'm a mere tribute and he's the Head Gamemaker? So powerful, so removed, so safe ... Suddenly I know just what I'm going to do. Something that will blow anything Peeta did right out of the water. I go over to the knot-tying station and get a length of rope. I start to manipulate it, but it's hard because I've never made this actual knot

myself. I've only watched Finnick's clever fingers, and
they moved so fast. After about ten minutes, I've come up with a respectable noose. I drag one of the target dummies out into the middle of the room and, using some chinning bars, hang it so it dangles by the neck. Tying its hands behind its back would be a nice touch, but I think I might be running out of time. I hurry over to the camouflage station, where some of the other tributes, undoubtedly the morphlings, have made a colossal mess. But I find a partial container of bloodred berry juice that will serve my needs. The flesh-colored fabric of the dummy's skin makes a good, absorbent canvas. I carefully finger paint the words on its body, concealing them from view. Then I step away quickly to watch the reaction on the Gamemakers' faces as they read the name on the dummy. SENECA CRANE. The effect on the Gamemakers is immediate and satisfying. Several let out small shrieks. Others lose their grips on their wineglasses,

which shatter musically against the ground. Two seem to be considering fainting. The look of shock is unanimous. Now I have Plutarch Heavensbee's attention. He stares steadily at me as the juice from the peach he crushed in his hand runs through his fingers. Finally he clears his throat and says, "You may go now, Miss Everdeen." I give a respectful nod and turn to go, but at the last moment I can't resist tossing the container of berry juice over my shoulder. I can hear the contents splatter against the dummy while a couple more wineglasses break. As the elevator doors close before me, I see no one has moved. That surprised them, I think. It was rash and dangerous and no doubt I will pay for it ten times over. But for the moment, I feel something close to elation and I let myself savor it. I want to find Haymitch immediately and tell him about my session, but no one's around. I guess they're getting ready for dinner and I decide
to go take a shower myself, since my hands are stained from the juice. As I stand in the water, I begin to wonder about the wisdom of my latest trick. The question that should now always be my guide is "Will this help Peeta stay alive?" Indirectly, this might not. What happens in training is highly secretive, so there's no point in taking action against me when no one will know what my transgression was. In fact, last year I was rewarded for my brashness. This is a different sort of crime, though. If the Gamemakers are angry with me and decide to punish me in the arena, Peeta could get caught up in the attack as well. Maybe it was too impulsive. Still ... I can't say I'm sorry I did it. As we all gather for dinner, I notice Peeta's hands are faintly stained with a variety of colors, even though his hair is still damp from bathing. He must have done some form of camouflage after all. Once the soup is served, Haymitch gets right to the

issue on everyone's mind. "All right, so how did your private sessions go?" I exchange a look

with Peeta. Somehow I'm not that eager to put what I did into words. In the calm of the dining room, it seems very extreme. "You first," I say to him. "It must have been really special. I had to wait for forty minutes to go in." Peeta seems to be struck with the same reluctance I'm experiencing. "Well, I -- I did the camouflage thing, like you suggested, Katniss." He hesitates. "Not exactly camouflage. I mean, I used the dyes." "To do what?" asks Portia. I think of how ruffled the Gamemakers were when I entered the gym for my session. The smell of cleaners. The mat pulled over that spot in the center of the gym. Was it to conceal something they were unable to wash away? "You painted something, didn't you? A picture." "Did you see it?" Peeta asks. "No. But they'd
made a real point of covering it up," I say. "Well, that would be standard. They can't let one tribute know what another did," says Effie, unconcerned. "What did you paint, Peeta?" She looks a little misty. "Was it a picture of Katniss?" "Why would he paint a picture of me, Effie?" I ask, somehow annoyed. "To show he's going to do everything he can to defend you. That's what everyone in the Capitol's expecting, anyway. Didn't he volunteer to go in with you?" Effie says, as if it's the most obvious thing in the world. "Actually, I painted a picture of Rue," Peeta says. "How she looked after Katniss had covered her in flowers." There's a long pause at the table while everyone absorbs this. "And what exactly were you trying to accomplish?" Haymitch asks in a very measured voice. "I'm not sure. I just wanted to hold them accountable, if only for a moment," says Peeta. "For killing that little girl." "This is dreadful." Effie sounds like she's about

to cry. "That sort of thinking ... it's forbidden, Peeta. Absolutely. You'll only bring down more trouble on yourself and Katniss." "I have to agree with Effie on this one," says Haymitch. Portia and Cinna remain silent, but their faces are very serious. Of course, they're right. But even though it worries me, I think what he did was amazing. "I guess this is a bad time to mention I hung a dummy and painted Seneca Crane's name on it," I say. This has the desired effect. After a moment of disbelief, all the disapproval in the room hits me like a ton of bricks. "You ... hung ... Seneca Crane?" says Cinna. "Yes. I was showing off my new knot-tying skills, and he somehow ended up at the end of the noose," I say. "Oh, Katniss," says Effie in a hushed voice. "How do you even know about that?" "Is it a secret? President Snow didn't act like it was. In fact, he seemed eager for me to know," I say. Effie leaves the table with her napkin pressed to her face.
"Now I've upset Effie. I should have lied and said I shot some arrows." "You'd have thought we planned it," says Peeta, giving me just the hint of a smile. "Didn't you?" asks Portia. Her fingers press her eyelids closed as if she's warding off a very

bright light. "No," I say, looking at Peeta with a new sense of appreciation. "Neither of us even knew what we were going to do before we went in." "And, Haymitch?" says Peeta. "We decided we don't want any other allies in the arena." "Good. Then I won't be responsible for you killing off any of my friends with your stupidity," he says. "That's just what we were thinking," I tell him. We finish the meal in silence, but when we rise to go into the sitting room, Cinna puts his arm around me and gives me a squeeze. "Come on and let's go get those training scores." We gather around the television set

and a red-eyed Effie rejoins us. The tributes' faces come up, district by district, and their scores flash under their pictures. One through twelve. Predictably high scores for Cashmere, Gloss, Brutus, Enobaria, and Finnick. Low to medium for the rest. "Have they ever given a zero?" I ask. "No, but there's a first time for everything," Cinna answers. And it turns out he's right. Because when Peeta and I each pull a twelve, we make Hunger Games history. No one feels like celebrating, though. "Why did they do that?" I ask. "So that the others will have no choice but to target you," says Haymitch flatly. "Go to bed. I can't stand to look at either one of you." Peeta walks me down to my room in silence, but before he can say good night, I wrap my arms around him and rest my head against his chest. His hands slide up my back and his cheek leans against my hair. "I'm sorry if I made things worse," I say. "No worse than I did. Why did you do it,
anyway?" he says. "I don't know. To show them that I'm more than just a piece in their Games?" I say. He laughs a little, no doubt remembering the night before the Games last year. We were on the roof, neither of us able to sleep. Peeta had said something of the sort then, but I hadn't understood what he meant. Now I do. "Me, too," he tells me. "And I'm not saying I'm not going to try. To get you home, I mean. But if I'm perfectly honest about it ..." "If you're perfectly honest about it, you think President Snow has probably given them direct orders to make sure we die in the arena anyway," I say. "It's crossed my mind," says Peeta. It's crossed my mind, too. Repeatedly. But while I know I'll never leave that arena alive, I'm still holding on to the hope that Peeta will. After all, he didn't pull out those berries, I did. No one has ever doubted that Peeta's defiance was motivated by love. So maybe President Snow will prefer keeping him alive, crushed

and heartbroken, as a living warning to others. "But even if that happens, everyone will know we've gone out fighting, right?" Peeta asks. "Everyone will," I reply. And for the first time, I distance myself from the personal tragedy that has consumed me since they announced the Quell. I remember the

old man they shot in District 11, and Bonnie and Twill, and the rumored uprisings. Yes, everyone in the districts will be watching me to see how I handle this death sentence, this final act of President Snow's dominance. They will be looking for some sign that their battles have not been in vain. If I can make it clear that I'm still defying the Capitol right up to the end, the Capitol will have killed me ... but not my spirit. What better way to give hope to the rebels? The beauty of this idea is that my decision to keep Peeta alive at
the expense of my own life is itself an act of defiance. A refusal to play the Hunger Games by the Capitol's rules. My private agenda dovetails completely with my public one. And if I really could save Peeta ... in terms of a revolution, this would be ideal. Because I will be more valuable dead. They can turn me into some kind of martyr for the cause and paint my face on banners, and it will do more to rally people than anything I could do if I was living. But Peeta would be more valuable alive, and tragic, because he will be able to turn his pain into words that will transform people. Peeta would lose it if he knew I was thinking any of this, so I only say, "So what should we do with our last few days?" "I just want to spend every possible minute of the rest of my life with you," Peeta replies. "Come on, then," I say, pulling him into my room. It feels like such a luxury, sleeping with Peeta again. I didn't realize until now how starved I've been for

human closeness. For the feel of him beside me in the darkness. I wish I hadn't wasted the last couple of nights shutting him out. I sink down into sleep, enveloped in his warmth, and when I open my eyes again, daylight's streaming through the windows. "No nightmares," he says. "No nightmares," I confirm. "You?" "None. I'd forgotten what a real night's sleep feels like," he says. We lie there for a while, in no rush to begin the day. Tomorrow night will be the televised interview, so today Effie and Haymitch should be coaching us. More high heels and sarcastic comments, I think. But then the redheaded Avox girl comes in with a note from Effie saying that, given our recent tour, both she and Haymitch have agreed we can handle ourselves adequately in public. The coaching sessions have been canceled. "Really?" says Peeta, taking the note from my hand and examining it. "Do you know what this means? We'll have the
whole day to ourselves." "It's too bad we can't go somewhere," I say wistfully. "Who says we can't?" he asks. The roof. We order a bunch of food, grab some blankets, and head up to the roof for a picnic. A daylong picnic in the flower garden that tinkles with wind chimes. We eat. We lie in the sun. I snap off hanging vines and use my newfound knowledge from training to practice knots and weave nets. Peeta sketches me. We make up a game with the force field that surrounds the roof--one of us throws an apple into it and the

other person has to catch it. No one bothers us. By late afternoon, I lie with my head on Peeta's lap, making a crown of flowers while he fiddles with my hair, claiming he's practicing his knots. After a while, his hands go still. "What?" I ask. "I wish I could freeze this moment, right here, right

now, and live in it forever," he says. Usually this sort of comment, the kind that hints of his undying love for me, makes me feel guilty and awful. But I feel so warm and relaxed and beyond worrying about a future I'll never have, I just let the word slip out. "Okay." I can hear the smile in his voice. "Then you'll allow it?" "I'll allow it," I say. His fingers go back to my hair and I doze off, but he rouses me to see the sunset. It's a spectacular yellow and orange blaze behind the skyline of the Capitol. "I didn't think you'd want to miss it," he says. "Thanks," I say. Because I can count on my fingers the number of sunsets I have left, and I don't want to miss any of them. We don't go and join the others for dinner, and no one summons us. "I'm glad. I'm tired of making everyone around me so miserable," says Peeta. "Everybody crying. Or Haymitch ..." He doesn't need to go on. We stay on the roof until bedtime and then quietly slip down to my room
without encountering anyone. The next morning, we're roused by my prep team. The sight of Peeta and me sleeping together is too much for Octavia, because she bursts into tears right away. "You remember what Cinna told us," Venia says fiercely. Octavia nods and goes out sobbing. Peeta has to return to his room for prep, and I'm left alone with Venia and Flavius. The usual chatter has been suspended. In fact, there's little talk at all, other than to have me raise my chin or comment on a makeup technique. It's nearly lunch when I feel something dripping on my shoulder and turn to find Flavius, who's snipping away at my hair with silent tears running down his face. Venia gives him a look, and he gently sets the scissors on the table and leaves. Then it's just Venia, whose skin is so pale her tattoos appear to be leaping off it. Almost rigid with determination, she does my hair and nails and makeup, fingers flying swiftly to compensate for her

absent teammates. The whole time, she avoids my gaze. It's only when Cinna shows up to approve me and dismiss her that she takes my hands, looks me straight in the eye, and says, "We would all like you to know what a ... privilege it has been to make you look your best." Then she hastens from the room. My prep team. My foolish, shallow, affectionate pets, with their obsessions with feathers and parties, nearly break my heart with their good-bye. It's certain from Venia's last words that we all know I won't be returning. Does the whole world know it? I wonder. I look at Cinna. He knows, certainly. But as he promised, there's no danger of tears from him. "So, what am I wearing tonight?" I ask, eyeing the garment bag that holds

my dress. "President Snow put in the dress order himself," says Cinna. He unzips the bag, revealing one of the
wedding dresses I wore for the photo shoot. Heavy white silk with a low neckline and tight waist and sleeves that fall from my wrists to the floor. And pearls. Everywhere pearls. Stitched into the dress and in ropes at my throat and forming the crown for the veil. "Even though they announced the Quarter Quell the night of the photo shoot, people Still voted for their favorite dress, and this was the winner. The president says you're to wear it tonight. Our objections were ignored." I rub a bit of the silk between my fingers, trying to figure out President Snow's reasoning. I suppose since I was the greatest offender, my pain and loss and humiliation should be in the brightest spotlight. This, he thinks, will make that clear. It's so barbaric, the president turning my bridal gown into my shroud, that the blow strikes home, leaving me with a dull ache inside. "Well, it'd be a shame to waste such a pretty dress" is all I say. Cinna helps

me carefully into the gown. As it settles on my shoulders, they can't help giving a shrug of complaint. "Was it always this heavy?" I ask. I remember several of the dresses being dense, but this one feels like it weighs a ton. "I had to make some slight alterations because of the lighting," says Cinna. I nod, but I can't see what that has to do with anything. He decks me out in the shoes and the pearl jewelry and the veil. Touches up my makeup. Has me walk. "You're ravishing," he says. "Now, Katniss, because this bodice is so fitted, I don't want you raising your arms above your head. Well, not until you twirl, anyway." "Will I be twirling again?" I ask, thinking of my dress last year. "I'm sure Caesar will ask you. And if he doesn't, you suggest it yourself. Only not right away. Save it for your big finale," Cinna instructs me. "You give me a signal so I know when," I say. "All right. Any plans for your interview? I know Haymitch left you two to your
own devices," he says. "No, this year I'm just winging it. The funny thing is, I'm not nervous at all." And I'm not. However much President Snow may hate me, this Capitol audience is mine. We meet up with Effie, Haymitch, Portia, and Peeta at the elevator. Peeta's in an elegant tuxedo and white gloves. The sort of thing grooms wear to get married in, here in the Capitol. Back home everything is so much simpler. A woman usually rents a white dress that's been worn hundreds of times. The man wears something clean that's not mining clothes. They fill out some forms at the Justice Building and are assigned a house. Family and friends gather for a meal or bit of cake, if it can be afforded. Even if it can't, there's always a traditional song we sing as the new couple crosses the threshold of their home. And we have our own little ceremony, where they make their first fire, toast a bit of bread, and share it. Maybe it's

old-fashioned, but no one really feels married in District 12 until after the toasting. The other tributes have already gathered offstage and are talking softly, but when Peeta and I arrive, they fall silent. I realize everyone's staring daggers at my wedding dress. Are they jealous of its beauty? The power it might have to manipulate the crowd? Finally Finnick says, "I can't believe Cinna put you in that thing." "He didn't have any choice. President Snow made him," I say, somewhat defensively. I won't let anyone criticize Cinna. Cashmere tosses her flowing blond curls back and spits out, "Well, you look ridiculous!" She grabs her brother's hand and pulls him into place to lead our procession onto the stage. The other tributes begin to line up as well. I'm confused because, while they all are angry, some are giving us sympathetic pats on the shoulder, and Johanna Mason actually stops to straighten my pearl necklace. "Make
him pay for it, okay?" she says. I nod, but I don't know what she means. Not until we're all sitting out onstage and Caesar Flickerman, hair and face highlighted in lavender this year, has done his opening spiel and the tributes begin their interviews. This is the first time I realize the depth of betrayal felt among the victors and the rage that accompanies it. But they are so smart, so wonderfully smart about how they play it, because it all comes back to reflect on the government and President Snow in particular. Not everyone. There are the old throwbacks, like Brutus and Enobaria, who are just here for another Games, and those too baffled or drugged or lost to join in on the attack. But there are enough victors who still have the wits and the nerve to come out fighting. Cashmere starts the ball rolling with a speech about how she just can't stop crying when she thinks of how much the people in the Capitol must be

suffering because they will lose us. Gloss recalls the kindness shown here to him and his sister. Beetee questions the legality of the Quell in his nervous, twitchy way, wondering if it's been fully examined by experts of late. Finnick recites a poem he wrote to his one true love in the Capitol, and about a hundred people faint because they're sure he means them. By the time Johanna Mason gets up, she's asking if something can't be done about the situation. Surely the creators of the Quarter Quell never anticipated such love forming between the victors and the Capitol. No one could be so cruel as to sever such a deep bond. Seeder quietly ruminates about how, back in District 11, everyone assumes President Snow is all-powerful. So if he's all-powerful, why doesn't he change the Quell? And Chaff, who comes right on her heels, insists the president could change the Quell if he wanted to, but he must not think it
matters much to anyone. By the time I'm introduced, the audience is an absolute wreck. People have been weeping and collapsing and even calling for change. The sight of me in my

white silk bridal gown practically causes a riot. No more me, no more star-crossed lovers living happily ever after, no more wedding. I can see even Caesar's professionalism showing some cracks as he tries to quiet them so I can speak, but my three minutes are ticking quickly away. Finally there's a lull and he gets out, "So, Katniss, obviously this is a very emotional night for everyone. Is there anything you'd like to say?" My voice trembles as I speak. "Only that I'm so sorry you won't get to be at my wedding ... but I'm glad you at least get to see me in my dress. Isn't it just ... the most beautiful thing?" I don't

have to look at Cinna for a signal. I know this is the right time. I begin to twirl slowly, raising the sleeves of my heavy gown above my head. When I hear the screams of the crowd, I think it's because I must look stunning. Then I notice something is rising up around me. Smoke. From fire. Not the flickery

stuff I wore last year in the chariot, but something much more real that devours my dress. I begin to panic as the smoke thickens. Charred bits of black silk swirl into the air, and pearls clatter to the stage. Somehow I'm afraid to stop because my flesh doesn't seem to be burning and I know Cinna must be behind whatever is happening. So I keep spinning and spinning. For a split second I'm gasping, completely engulfed in the strange flames. Then all at once, the fire is gone. I slowly come to a stop, wondering if I'm
naked and why Cinna has arranged to burn away my wedding dress. But I'm not naked. I'm in a dress of the exact design of my wedding dress, only it's the color of coal and made of tiny feathers. Wonderingly, I lift my long, flowing sleeves into the air, and that's when I see myself on the television screen. Clothed in black except for the white patches on my sleeves. Or should I say my wings. Because Cinna has turned me into a mockingjay. I'm still smoldering a little, so it's with a tentative hand that Caesar reaches out to touch my headpiece. The white has burned away, leaving a smooth, fitted veil of black that drapes into the neckline of the dress in the back. "Feathers," says Caesar. "You're like a bird." "A mockingjay, I think," I say, giving my wings a small flap. "It's the bird on the pin I wear as a token." A shadow of recognition flickers across Caesar's face, and I can tell he knows that the mockingjay isn't just my token. That it's come

to symbolize so much more. That what will be seen as a flashy costume change in the Capitol is resonating in an entirely different way throughout the districts. But he makes the best of it. "Well, hats off to your stylist. I don't think anyone can argue that that's not the most spectacular thing we've ever seen in an interview. Cinna, I think you better take a bow!" Caesar gestures for Cinna to rise. He does, and makes a small, gracious bow. And suddenly I am so afraid for him. What has he done? Something terribly dangerous. An act of rebellion in itself. And he's done it for me. I remember his words ... "Don't worry. I always channel my emotions into my work. That way I don't hurt anyone but myself." ... and I'm afraid he has hurt himself beyond repair. The significance of my fiery transformation will not be lost on President Snow. The audience, who's been stunned into silence, breaks into wild applause. I can barely hear the
buzzer that indicates that my three minutes are up. Caesar thanks me and I go back to my seat, my dress now feeling lighter than air. As I pass Peeta, who's headed for his interview, he doesn't meet my eyes. I take my seat carefully, but aside from the puffs of smoke here and there, I seem unharmed, so I turn my attention to him. Caesar and Peeta have been a natural team since they first appeared together a year ago. Their easy give-and-take, comic timing, and ability to segue into heart- wrenching moments, like Peeta's confession of

love for me, have made them a huge success with the audience. They effortlessly open with a few jokes about fires and feathers and overcooking poultry. But anyone can see that Peeta is preoccupied, so Caesar directs the conversation right into the subject that's on everyone's minds. "So, Peeta,

what was it like when, after all you've been through, you found out about the Quell?" asks Caesar. "I was in shock. I mean, one minute I'm seeing Katniss looking so beautiful in all these wedding gowns, and the next ..." Peeta trails off. "You realized there was never going to be a wedding?" asks Caesar gently. Peeta pauses for a long moment, as if deciding something. He looks out at the spellbound audience, then at tin floor, then finally up at Caesar. "Caesar, do you think all our friends here can keep a secret?" An uncomfortable laugh emanates from the audience. What can he mean? Keep a secret from who? Our whole world is watching. "I feel quite certain of it," says Caesar. "We're already married," says Peeta quietly. The crowd reacts in astonishment, and I have to bury my face in the folds of my skirt so they can't see my confusion. Where on earth is he going with this? "But ... how can that be?" asks Caesar. "Oh, it's not an official marriage. We
didn't go to the Justice Building or anything. But we have this marriage ritual in District Twelve. I don't know what it's like in the other districts. But there's this thing we do," says Peeta, and he briefly describes the toasting. "Were your families there?" asks Caesar. "No, we didn't tell anyone. Not even Haymitch. And Katniss's mother would never have approved. But you see, we knew if we were married in the Capitol, there wouldn't be a toasting. And neither of us really wanted to wait any longer. So one day, we just did it," Peeta says. "And to us, we're more married than any piece of paper or big party could make us." "So this was before the Quell?" says Caesar. "Of course before the Quell. I'm sure we'd never have done it after we knew," says Peeta, starting to get upset. "But who could've seen it coming? No one. We went through the Games, we were victors, everyone seemed so thrilled to see us together, and then out of nowhere--I mean, how could

we anticipate a thing like that?" "You couldn't, Peeta." Caesar puts an arm around his shoulders. "As you say, no one could've. But I have to confess, I'm glad you two had at least a few months of happiness together." Enormous applause. As if encouraged, I look up from my feathers and let the audience see my tragic smile of thanks. The residual smoke from the feathers has made my eyes teary, which adds a very nice touch. "I'm not glad," says Peeta. "I wish we had waited until the whole thing was done officially." This takes even Caesar aback. "Surely even a brief time is better than no time?" "Maybe I'd think that, too, Caesar," says Peeta bitterly, "if it weren't for the baby." There. He's done it again.

Dropped a bomb that wipes out the efforts of every tribute who came before him. Well, maybe not. Maybe this year he has only lit the fuse on a bomb that the victors
themselves have been building. Hoping someone would be able to detonate it. Perhaps thinking it would be me in my bridal gown. Not knowing how much I rely on Cinna's talents, whereas Peeta needs nothing more than his wits. As the bomb explodes, it sends accusations of injustice and barbarism and cruelty flying out in every direction. Even the most Capitol-loving, Games-hungry, bloodthirsty person out there can't ignore, at least for a moment, how horrific the whole thing is. I am pregnant. The audience can't absorb the news right away. It has to strike them and sink in and be confirmed by other voices before they begin to sound like a herd of wounded animals, moaning, shrieking, calling for help. And me? I know my face is projected in a tight close-up on the screen, but I don't make any effort to hide it. Because for a moment, even I am working through what Peeta has said. Isn't it the thing I dreaded most about the wedding,

about the future--the loss of my children to the Games? And it could be true now, couldn't it? If I hadn't spent my life building up layers of defenses until I recoil at even the suggestion of marriage or a family? Caesar can't rein in the crowd again, not even when the buzzer sounds. Peeta nods his good-bye and comes back to his seat without any more conversation. I can see Caesar's lips moving, but the place is in total chaos and I can't hear a word. Only the blast of the anthem, cranked up so loud I can feel it vibrating through my bones, lets us know where we stand in the program. I automatically rise and, as I do, I sense Peeta reaching out for me. Tears run down his face as I take his hand. How real are the tears? Is this an acknowledgment that he has been stalked by the same fears that I have? That every victor has? Every parent in every district in Panem? I look back to the crowd, but the faces of Rue's mother and father swim before
my eyes. Their sorrow. Their loss. I turn spontaneously to Chaff and offer my hand. I feel my fingers close around the stump that now completes his arm and hold fast. And then it happens. Up and down the row, the victors begin to join hands. Some right away, like the morphlings, or Wiress and Beetee. Others unsure but caught up in the demands of those around them, like Brutus and Enobaria. By the time the anthem plays its final strains, all twenty-four of us stand in one unbroken line in what must be the first public show of unity among the districts since the Dark Days. You can see the realization of this as the screens begin to pop into blackness. It's too late, though. In the confusion they didn't cut us off in time. Everyone has seen. There's disorder on the stage now, too, as the lights go out and we're left to stumble back into the Training Center. I've lost hold of Chaff, but Peeta guides me

into an elevator. Finnick and Johanna try to join us, but a harried Peacekeeper blocks their way and we shoot upward alone. The moment we step off the elevator, Peeta grips my shoulders. "There isn't much time, so tell me. Is there anything I have to apologize for?" "Nothing," I say. It was a big leap to take without my okay, but I'm just as glad I didn't know, didn't have time to second-guess him, to let any guilt over Gale detract from how I really feel about what Peeta did. Which is empowered. Somewhere, very far off, is a place called District 12, where my mother and sister and friends will have to deal with the fallout from this night. Just a brief hovercraft ride away is an arena where, tomorrow, Peeta and I and the other tributes will face our own form of punishment. But even if all of us meet terrible ends, something happened on that stage tonight that can't be undone. We victors staged our own uprising, and maybe,
just maybe, the Capitol won't be able to contain this one. We wait for the others to return, but when the elevator opens, only Haymitch appears. "It's madness out there. Everyone's been sent home and they've canceled the recap of the interviews on television." Peeta and I hurry to the window and try to make sense of the commotion far below us on the streets. "What are they saying?" Peeta asks. "Are they asking the president to stop the Games?" "I don't think they know themselves what to ask. The whole situation is unprecedented. Even the idea of opposing the Capitol's agenda is a source of confusion for the people here," says Haymitch. "But there's no way Snow would cancel the Games. You know that, right?" I do. Of course, he could never back down now. The only option left to him is to strike back, and strike back hard. "The others went home?" I ask. "They were ordered to. I don't know how much luck they're having

getting through the mob," says Haymitch. "Then we'll never see Effie again," says Peeta. We didn't see her on the morning of the Games last year. "You'll give her our thanks." "More than that. Really make it special. It's Effie, after all," I say. "Tell her how appreciative we are and how she was the best escort ever and tell her ... tell her we send our love." For a while we just stand there in silence, delaying the inevitable. Then Haymitch says it. "I guess this is where we say our good-byes as well." "Any last words of advice?" Peeta asks. "Stay alive," Haymitch says gruffly. That's almost an old joke with us now. He gives us each a quick embrace, and I can tell it's all he can stand. "Go to bed. You need your rest." I know I should say a whole bunch of things to Haymitch, but I can't think of anything he doesn't already know, really, and my throat is so tight I doubt anything would come out, anyway. So, once again, I let Peeta speak for us both. "You take care,
Haymitch," he says. We cross the room, but in the doorway, Haymitch's voice stops us. "Katniss, when you're

in the arena," he begins. Then he pauses. He's scowling in a way that makes me sure I've already disappointed him. "What?" I ask defensively. "You just remember who the enemy is," Haymitch tells me. "That's all. Now go on. Get out of here."

We walk down the hallway. Peeta wants to stop by his room to shower off the makeup and meet me in a few minutes, but I won't let him. I'm certain that if a door shuts between us, it will lock and I'll have to spend the night without him. Besides, I have a shower in my room. I refuse to let go of his hand. Do we sleep? I don't know. We spend the night holding each other, in some halfway land between

dreams and waking. Not talking. Both afraid to disturb the other in the hope that we'll be able to store up a few precious minutes of rest. Cinna and Portia arrive with the dawn, and I know Peeta will have to go. Tributes enter the arena alone. He gives me a light kiss. "See you soon," he says. "See you soon," I answer. Cinna, who will help dress me for the Games, accompanies me to the roof. I'm about to mount the ladder to the hovercraft when I remember. "I didn't say good- bye to Portia." "I'll tell her," says Cinna. The electric current freezes me in place on the ladder until the doctor injects the tracker into my left forearm. Now they will always be able to locate me in the arena. The hovercraft takes off, and I look out the windows until they black out. Cinna keeps pressing me to eat and, when that fails, to drink. I manage to keep sipping water, thinking of the days of dehydration that almost killed me last year. Thinking of how I will need my
strength to keep Peeta alive. When we reach the Launch Room at the arena, I shower. Cinna braids my hair down my back and helps me dress over simple undergarments. This year's tribute outfit is a fitted blue jumpsuit, made of very sheer material, that zippers up the front. A six-inch-wide padded belt covered in shiny purple plastic. A pair of nylon shoes with rubber soles. "What do you think?" I ask, holding the fabric out for Cinna to examine. He frowns as he rubs the thin stuff between his fingers. "I don't know. It will offer little in the way of protection from cold or water." "Sun?" I ask, picturing a burning sun over a barren desert. "Possibly. If it's been treated," he says. "Oh, I almost forgot this." He takes my gold mockingjay pin from his pocket and fixes it to the jumpsuit. "My dress was fantastic last night," I say. Fantastic and reckless. But Cinna must know that. "I thought you might like

it," he says with a tight smile. We sit, as we did last year, holding hands until the voice tells me to prepare for the launch. He walks me over to the circular metal plate and zips up the neck of my jumpsuit securely. "Remember, girl on fire," he says, "I'm still betting on you." He kisses my forehead and steps back as the glass cylinder slides down around me. "Thank you," I say, although he probably can't hear me. I lift my chin, holding my head high the way he always tells me to, and wait for the plate to rise. But it doesn't. And it still doesn't. I look at Cinna, raising my eyebrows for an explanation. He just gives his head a slight shake, as

perplexed as I am. Why are they delaying this? Suddenly the door behind him bursts open and three Peacekeepers spring into the room. Two pin Cinna's arms behind him and cuff him while the third hits him in the
temple with such force he's knocked to his knees. But they keep hitting him with metal-studded gloves, opening gashes on his face and body. I'm screaming my head off, banging on the unyielding glass, trying to reach him. The Peacekeepers ignore me completely as they drag Cinna's limp body from the room. All that's left are the smears of blood on the floor. Sickened and terrified, I feel the plate begin to rise. I'm still leaning against the glass when the breeze catches my hair and I force myself to straighten up. Just in time, too, because the glass is retreating and I'm standing free in the arena. Something seems to be wrong with my vision. The ground is too bright and shiny and keeps undulating. I squint down at my feet and see that my metal plate is surrounded by blue waves that lap up over my boots. Slowly I raise my eyes and take in the water spreading out in every direction. I can only form one clear thought.

This is no place for a girl on fire. PART III "THE ENEMY"

"Ladies and gentlemen, let the Seventy-fifth Hunger Games begin!" The voice of Claudius Templesmith, the Hunger Games announcer, hammers my ears. I have less than a minute to get my bearings. Then the gong will sound and the tributes will be free to move off their metal plates. But move where? I can't think straight. The image of Cinna, beaten and bloody, consumes me. Where is he now? What are they doing to him? Torturing him? Killing him? Turning him into an Avox? Obviously his assault was staged to unhinge me, the same way Darius's presence in my quarters was. And it has unhinged me. All I want to do is collapse on my metal plate. But I can hardly do that after what I just witnessed. I must be strong. I owe it to Cinna, who risked everything by undermining President Snow and turning my
bridal silk into mockingjay plumage. And I owe it to the rebels who, emboldened by Cinna's example, might be fighting to bring down the Capitol at this moment. My refusal to play the Games on the Capitol's terms is to be my last act of rebellion. So I grit my teeth and will myself to be a player. Where are you? I can still make no sense of my surroundings. Where are you?! I demand an answer from myself and slowly the world comes into focus. Blue water. Pink sky. White-hot sun beating down. All right, there's the Cornucopia, the shining gold metal horn, about forty yards away. At first, it appears to be sitting on a circular island. But on closer examination, I see the thin strips of land radiating from the circle like the spokes on a wheel. I think there are ten to twelve, and they seem equidistant from one another. Between

the spokes, all is water. Water and a pair of tributes. That's it, then. There are twelve spokes, each with two tributes balanced on metal plates between them. The other tribute in my watery wedge is old Woof from District 8. He's about as far to my right as the land strip on my left. Beyond the water, wherever you look, a narrow beach and then dense greenery. I scan the circle of tributes, looking for Peeta, but he must be blocked from my view by the Cornucopia. I catch a handful of water as it washes in and smell it. Then I touch the tip of my wet finger to my tongue. As I suspected, it's saltwater. Just like the waves Peeta and I encountered on our brief tour of the beach in District 4. But at least it seems clean. There are no boats, no ropes, not even a bit of driftwood to cling to. No, there's only one way to get to the Cornucopia. When the gong sounds, I don't even hesitate before I dive to my left. It's a longer distance than
I'm used to, and navigating the waves takes a little more skill than swimming across my quiet lake at home, but my body seems oddly light and I cut through the water effortlessly. Maybe it's the salt. I pull myself, dripping, onto the land strip and sprint down the sandy stretch for the Cornucopia. I can see no one else converging from my side, although the gold horn blocks a good portion of my view. I don't let the thought of adversaries slow me down, though. I'm thinking like a Career now, and the first thing I want is to get my hands on a weapon. Last year, the supplies were spread out quite a distance around the Cornucopia, with the most valuable closest to the horn. But this year, the booty seems to be piled at the twenty-foot-high mouth. My eyes instantly home in on a golden bow just in arm's reach and I yank it free. There's someone behind me. I'm alerted by, I don't know, a soft shift of sand or maybe just a change in the

air currents. I pull an arrow from the sheath that's still wedged in the pile and arm my bow as I turn. Finnick, glistening and gorgeous, stands a few yards away, with a trident poised to attack. A net dangles from his other hand. He's smiling a little, but the muscles in his upper body are rigid in anticipation. "You can swim, too," he says. "Where did you learn that in District Twelve?" "We have a big bathtub," I answer. "You must," he says. "You like the arena?" "Not particularly. But you should. They must have built it especially for you," I say with an edge of bitterness. It seems like it, anyway, with all the water, when I bet only a handful of the victors can swim. And there was no pool in the Training Center, no chance to learn. Either you came in here a swimmer or you'd better be a really fast learner. Even participation in the initial bloodbath depends on being able to cover twenty yards of water. That gives District 4 an
enormous advantage. For a moment we're frozen, sizing each other up, our weapons, our skill. Then Finnick suddenly grins. "Lucky

thing we're allies. Right?" Sensing a trap, I'm about to let my arrow fly, hoping it finds his heart before the trident impales me, when he shifts his hand and something on his wrist catches the sunlight. A solid-gold bangle patterned with flames. The same one I remember on Haymitch's wrist the morning I began training. I briefly consider that Finnick could have stolen it to trick me, but somehow I know this isn't the case. Haymitch gave it to him. As a signal to me. An order, really. To trust Finnick. I can hear other footsteps approaching. I must decide at once. "Right!" I snap, because even though Haymitch is my mentor and trying to keep me alive, this angers me. Why didn't he tell me he'd made this

arrangement before? Probably because Peeta and I had ruled out allies. Now Haymitch has chosen one on his own. "Duck!" Finnick commands in such a powerful voice, so different from his usual seductive purr, that I do. His trident goes whizzing over my head and there's a sickening sound of impact as it finds its target. The man from District 5, the drunk who threw up on the sword-fighting floor, sinks to his knees as Finnick frees the trident from his chest. "Don't trust One and Two," Finnick says. There's no time to question this. I work the sheath of arrows free. "Each take one side?" I say. He nods, and I dart around the pile. About four spokes apart, Enobaria and Gloss are just reaching land. Either they're slow swimmers or they thought the water might be laced with other dangers, which it might well be. Sometimes it's not good to consider too many scenarios. But now that they're on the sand, they'll be here in a matter of seconds.
"Anything useful?" I hear Finnick shout. I quickly scan the pile on my side and find maces, swords, bows and arrows, tridents, knives, spears, axes, metallic objects I have no name for ... and nothing else. "Weapons!" I call back. "Nothing but weapons!" "Same here," he confirms. "Grab what you want and let's go!" I shoot an arrow at Enobaria, who's gotten in too close for comfort, but she's expecting it and dives back into the water before it can find its mark. Gloss isn't quite as swift, and I sink an arrow into his calf as he plunges into the waves. I sling an extra bow and a second sheath of arrows over my body, slide two long knives and an awl into my belt, and meet up with Finnick at the front of the pile. "Do something about that, would you?" he says. I see Brutus barreling toward us. His belt is undone and he has it stretched between his hands as a kind of shield. I shoot at him and he manages to block the arrow with his belt before it

can skewer his liver. Where it punctures the belt, a purple liquid spews forth, coating his face. As I reload, Brutus flattens on the ground, rolls the few feet to the water, and submerges. There's a clang of metal falling behind me. "Let's clear out," I say to Finnick. This last altercation has given Enobaria and Gloss time to reach the

Cornucopia. Brutus is within shooting distance and somewhere, certainly, Cashmere is nearby, too. These four classic Careers will no doubt have a prior alliance. If I had only my own safety to consider, I might be willing to take them on with Finnick by my side. But it's Peeta I'm thinking about. I spot him now, still stranded on his metal plate. I take off and Finnick follows without question, as if knowing this will be my next move. When I'm as close as I can get, I start removing knives from my belt, preparing to swim out
to reach him and somehow bring him in. Finnick drops a hand on my shoulder. "I'll get him." Suspicion flickers up inside me. Could this all just be a ruse? For Finnick to win my trust and then swim out and drown Peeta? "I can," I insist. But Finnick has dropped all his weapons to the ground. "Better not exert yourself. Not in your condition," he says, and reaches down and pats my abdomen. Oh, right. I'm supposed to be pregnant, I think. While I'm trying to think what that means and how I should act--maybe throw up or something--Finnick has positioned himself at the edge of the water. "Cover me," he says. He disappears with a flawless dive.

I raise my bow, warding off any attackers from the Cornucopia, but no one seems interested in pursuing us. Sure enough, Gloss, Cashmere, Enobaria, and Brutus have

gathered, their pack formed already, picking over the weapons. A quick survey of the rest of the arena shows that most of the tributes are still trapped on their plates. Wait, no, there's someone standing on the spoke to my left, the one opposite Peeta. It's Mags. But she neither heads for the Cornucopia nor tries to flee. Instead she splashes into the water and starts paddling toward me, her gray head bobbing above the waves. Well, she's old, but I guess after eighty years of living in District 4 she can keep afloat. Finnick has reached Peeta now and is towing him back, one arm across his chest while the other propels them through the water with easy strokes. Peeta rides along without resisting. I don't know what Finnick said or did that convinced him to put his life in his hands -- showed him the bangle, maybe. Or just the sight of me waiting might have been enough. When they reach the sand, I help haul Peeta up onto dry land. "Hello,
again," he says, and gives me a kiss. "We've got allies." "Yes. Just as Haymitch intended," I answer. "Remind me, did we make deals with anyone else?" Peeta asks. "Only Mags, I think," I say. I nod toward the old woman doggedly making her way toward us. "Well, I can't leave Mags behind," says Finnick. "She's one of the few people who actually likes me." "I've got no problem with Mags," I say. "Especially now that I see the arena. Het fishhooks are probably our best chance of getting a meal." "Katniss wanted her on the first day," says Peeta. "Katniss has remarkably good judgment," says Finnick. With one hand he reaches into the water and scoops out Mags like she weighs no more than a puppy. She makes some remark that I think includes the word "bob," then pats her belt. "Look, she's right. Someone figured it out." Finnick points to Beetee. He's flailing around in the waves but managing to keep his head above water. "What?" I say. "The

belts. They're flotation devices," says Finnick. "I mean, you have to propel yourself, but they'll keep you from drowning." I almost ask Finnick to wait, to get Beetee and Wiress and take them with us, but Beetee's three spokes over and I can't even see Wiress. For all I know, Finnick would kill them as quickly as he did the tribute from 5, so instead I suggest we move on. I hand Peeta a bow, a sheath of arrows, and a knife, keeping the rest for myself. But Mags tugs on my sleeve and babbles on until I've given the awl to her. Pleased, she clamps the handle between her gums and reaches her arms up to Finnick. He tosses his net over his shoulder, hoists Mags on top of it, grips his tridents in his free hand, and we run away from the Cornucopia. Where the sand ends, woods begin to rise sharply. No, not really woods. At least not the kind I know. Jungle. The foreign, almost obsoleteword comes to mind. Something I heard from another Hunger Games or learned from my father. Most of the trees are unfamiliar, with smooth trunks and few branches. The earth is very black and spongy underfoot, often obscured by tangles of vines with colorful blossoms. While the sun's hot and bright, the air's warm and heavy with moisture, and I get the feeling I will never really be dry here. The thin blue fabric of my jumpsuit lets the seawater evaporate easily, but it's already begun to cling to me with sweat. Peeta takes the lead, cutting through the patches of dense vegetation with his long knife. I make Finnick go second because even though he's the most powerful, he's got his hands full with Mags. Besides, while he's a whiz with that trident, it's a weapon less suited to the jungle than my arrows. It doesn't take long, between the steep incline and the heat, to become short of breath. Peeta and I have been training intensely,

though, and Finnick's such an amazing physical specimen that even with Mags over his shoulder, we climb rapidly for about a mile before he requests a rest. And then I think it's more for Mags's sake than his own. The foliage has hidden the wheel from sight, so I scale a tree with rubbery limbs to get a better view. And then wish that I hadn't. Around the Cornucopia, the ground appears to be bleeding; the water has purple stains. Bodies lie on the ground and float in the sea, but at this distance, with everyone dressed exactly the same, I can't tell who lives or dies. All I can tell is that some of the tiny blue figures still battle. Well, what did I think? That the victors' chain of locked hands last night would result in some sort of universal truce in the arena? No, I never believed that. But I guess I had hoped people might show some ... what? Restraint? Reluctance, at least. Before they jumped right into massacre mode. And you all knew
each other, I think. You acted like friends. I have only one real friend in here. And he isn't from District 4. I let the slight, soupy breeze cool my cheeks while I come to a decision. Despite the bangle, I should just get it over with and shoot Finnick. There's really no future in this alliance. And he's too dangerous to let go. Now, when we have this tentative trust, may be my only chance to kill him. I could easily shoot him in the back as we walk. It's despicable, of course, but will it be any more despicable if I wait? Know him better? Owe him more? No, this is the time. I take one last look at the battling figures, the bloody ground, to harden my resolve, and then slide to the ground. But when I land, I find Finnick's kept pace with my thoughts. As if he knows what I have seen and how it will have affected me. He has one of his tridents raised in a casually defensive position. "What's going on down there, Katniss? Have they all joined

hands? Taken a vow of nonviolence? Tossed the weapons in the sea in defiance of the Capitol?" Finnick asks. "No," I

say. "No," Finnick repeats. "Because whatever happened in the past is in the past. And no one in this arena was a victor by chance." He eyes Peeta for a moment. "Except maybe Peeta." Finnick knows then what Haymitch and I know. About Peeta. Being truly, deep-down better than the rest of us. Finnick took out that tribute from 5 without blinking an eye. And how long did I take to turn deadly? I shot to kill when I targeted Enobaria and Gloss and Brutus. Peeta would at least have attempted negotiations first. Seen if some wider alliance was possible. But to what end? Finnick's right. I'm right. The people in this arena weren't crowned for their compassion. I hold his gaze, weighing his speed against my own. The time it will take to send an arrow
through his brain versus the time his trident will reach my body. I can see him, waiting for me to make the first move. Calculating if he should block first or go directly for an attack. I can feel we've both about worked it out when Peeta steps deliberately between us. "So how many are dead?" he asks. Move, you idiot, I think. But he remains planted firmly between us. "Hard to say," I answer. "At least six, I think. And they're still fighting." "Let's keep moving. We need water," he says. So far there's been no sign of a freshwater stream or pond, and the saltwater's undrinkable. Again, I think of the last Games, where I nearly died of dehydration. "Better find some soon," says Finnick. "We need to be undercover when the others come hunting us tonight." We. Us. Hunting. All right, maybe killing Finnick would be a little premature. He's been helpful so far. He does have Haymitch's stamp of approval. And who knows what the

night will hold? If worse comes to worst, I can always kill him in his sleep. So I let the moment pass. And so does Finnick. The absence of water intensifies my thirst. I keep a sharp eye out as we continue our trek upward, but with no luck. After about another mile, I can see an end to the tree line and assume we're reaching the crest of the hill. "Maybe we'll have better luck on the other side. Find a spring or something." But there is no other side. I know this before anyone else, even though I am farthest from the top. My eyes catch on a funny, rippling square hanging like a warped pane of glass in the air. At first I think it's the glare from the sun or the heat shimmering up off the ground. But it's fixed in space, not shifting when I move. And that's when I connect the square with Wiress and Beetee in the Training Center and realize what lies before us. My warning cry is just reaching my lips when Peeta's knife swings out to slash away some
vines. There's a sharp zapping sound. For an instant, the trees are gone and I see open space over a short stretch of bare earth. Then Peeta's flung back from the force field, bringing Finnick and Mags to the ground. I rush over to where he lies, motionless in a web of vines. "Peeta?" There's a faint smell

of singed hair. I call his name again, giving him a little shake, but he's unresponsive. My fingers fumble across his lips, where there's no warm breath although moments ago he was panting. I press my ear against his chest, to the spot where I always rest my head, where I know I will hear the strong and steady beat of his heart. Instead, I find silence. "Peeta!" I scream. I shake him harder, even resort to slapping his face, but it's no use. His heart has failed. I am slapping emptiness. "Peeta!" Finnick props Mags against a tree and

pushes me out of the way. "Let me." His fingers touch points at Peeta's neck, run over the bones in his ribs and spine. Then he pinches Peeta's nostrils shut. "No!" I yell, hurling myself at Finnick, for surely he intends to make certain that Peeta's dead, to keep any hope of life from returning to him. Finnick's hand comes up and hits me so hard, so squarely in the chest that I go flying back into a nearby tree trunk. I'm stunned for a moment, by the pain, by trying to regain my wind, as I see Finnick close off Peeta's nose again. From where I sit, I pull an arrow, whip the notch into place, and am about to let it fly when I'm stopped by the sight of Finnick kissing Peeta. And it's so bizarre, even for Finnick, that I stay my hand. No, he's not kissing him. He's got Peeta's nose blocked off but his mouth tilted open, and he's blowing air into his lungs. I can see this, I can actually see Peeta's chest rising and falling. Then Finnick unzips the
top of Peeta's jumpsuit and begins to pump the spot over his heart with the heels of his hands. Now that I've gotten through my shock, I understand what he's trying to do. Once in a blue moon, I've seen my mother try something similar, but not often. If your heart fails in District 12, it's unlikely your family could get you to my mother in time, anyway. So her usual patients are burned or wounded or ill. Or starving, of course. But Finnick's world is different. Whatever he's doing, he's done it before. There's a very set rhythm and method. And I find the arrow tip sinking to the ground as I lean in to watch, desperately, for some sign of success. Agonizing minutes drag past as my hopes diminish. Around the time that I'm deciding it's too late, that Peeta's dead, moved on, unreachable forever, he gives a small cough and Finnick sits back. I leave my weapons in the dirt as I fling myself at him. "Peeta?" I say softly. I brush the

damp blond strands of hair back from his forehead, find the pulse drumming against my fingers at his neck. His lashes flutter open and his eyes meet mine. "Careful," he says weakly. "There's a force field up ahead." I laugh, but there are tears running down my cheeks. "Must be a lot stronger than the one on the Training Center roof," he says. "I'm all right, though. Just a little shaken." "You were dead! Your heart stopped!" I burst out, before really considering if this is a good idea. I clap my hand over my mouth

because I'm starting to make those awful choking sounds that happen when I sob. "Well, it seems to be working now," he says. "It's all right, Katniss." I nod my head but the sounds aren't stopping. "Katniss?" Now Peeta's worried about me, which adds to the insanity of it all. "It's okay. It's just her hormones," says Finnick. "From the baby." I look up and see
him, sitting back on his knees but still panting a bit from the climb and the heat and the effort of bringing Peeta back from the dead. "No. It's not--" I get out, but I'm cut off by an even more hysterical round of sobbing that seems only to confirm what Finnick said about the baby. He meets my eyes and I glare at him through my tears. It's stupid, I know, that his efforts make me so vexed. All I wanted was to keep Peeta alive, and I couldn't and Finnick could, and I should be nothing but grateful. And I am. But I am also furious because it means that I will never stop owing Finnick Odair. Ever. So how can I kill him in his

sleep? I expect to see a smug or sarcastic expression on his face, but his look is strangely quizzical. He glances between Peeta and me, as if trying to figure something out, then gives his head a slight shake as if to clear it. "How are

you?" he asks Peeta. "Do you think you can move on?" "No, he has to rest," I say. My nose is running like crazy and I don't even have a shred of fabric to use as a handkerchief. Mags rips off a handful of hanging moss from a tree limb and gives it to me. I'm too much of a mess to even question it. I blow my nose loudly and mop the tears off my face. It's nice, the moss. Absorbent and surprisingly soft. I notice a gleam of gold on Peeta's chest. I reach out and retrieve the disk that hangs from a chain around his neck. My mockingjay has been engraved on it. "Is this your token?" I ask. "Yes. Do you mind that I used your mockingjay? I wanted us to match," he says. "No, of course I don't mind." I force a smile. Peeta showing up in the arena wearing a mockingjay is both a blessing and a curse. On the one hand, it should give a boost to the rebels in the district. On the other, it's hard to imagine President Snow will overlook it, and that makes the job of
keeping Peeta alive harder. "So you want to make camp here, then?" Finnick asks. "I don't think that's an option," Peeta answers. "Staying here. With no water. No protection. I feel all right, really. If we could just go slowly." "Slowly would be better than not at all." Finnick helps Peeta to his feet while I pull myself together. Since I got up this morning I've watched Cinna beaten to a pulp, landed in another arena, and seen Peeta die. Still, I'm glad Finnick keeps playing the pregnancy card for me, because from a sponsor's point of view, I'm not handling things all that well. I check over my weapons, which I know are in perfect condition, because it makes me seem more in control. "I'll take the lead," I announce. Peeta starts to object but Finnick cuts him off. "No, let her do it." He frowns at me. "You knew that force field was there, didn't you? Right at the last second? You started to give a warning." I nod. "How did you know?" I hesitate. To

reveal that I know Beetee and Wiress's trick of recognizing a force field could be dangerous. I don't know if the Gamemakers made note of that moment during training when the two pointed it out to me or not. One way or the other, I have a very valuable piece of information. And if they know I have it, they might do something to alter the force field so I can't see the aberration anymore. So I lie. "I don't know. It's almost as if I could hear it. Listen." We all become still. There's the sound of insects, birds, the breeze in the foliage. "I don't hear anything," says Peeta. "Yes," I insist, "it's like when the fence around District Twelve is on, only much, much quieter." Everyone listens again intently. I do, too, although there's nothing to hear. "There!" I say. "Can't you hear

it? It's coming from right where Peeta got shocked." "I
don't hear it, either," says Finnick. "But if you do, by all means, take the lead." I decide to play this for all it's worth. "That's weird," I say. I turn my head from side to side as if puzzled. "I can only hear it out of my left ear." "The one the doctors reconstructed?" asks Peeta. "Yeah," I say, then give a shrug. "Maybe they did a better job than they thought. You know, sometimes I do hear funny things on that side. Things you wouldn't ordinarily think have a sound. Like insect wings. Or snow hitting the ground." Perfect. Now all the attention will turn to the surgeons who fixed my deaf ear after the Games last year, and they'll have to explain why I can hear like a bat. "You," says Mags, nudging me forward, so I take the lead. Since we're to be moving slowly, Mags prefers to walk with the aid of a branch Finnick quickly fashions into a cane for her. He makes a staff for Peeta as well, which is good because, despite his protestations, I think all Peeta

really wants to do is lie down. Finnick brings up the rear, so at least someone alert has our backs. I walk with the force field on my left, because that's supposed to be the side with my superhuman ear. But since that's all made up, I cut down a bunch of hard nuts that hang like grapes from a nearby tree and toss them ahead of me as I go. It's good I do, too, because I have a feeling I'm missing the patches that indicate the force field more often than I'm spotting them. Whenever a nut hits the force field, there's a puff of smoke before the nut lands, blackened and with a cracked shell, on the ground at my feet. After a few minutes I become aware of a smacking sound behind me and turn to see Mags peeling the shell off one of the nuts and popping it in her already-full mouth. "Mags!" I cry. "Spit that out. It could be poisonous." She mumbles something and ignores me, licking her lips with apparent relish. I look to Finnick for help but he just laughs.
"I guess we'll find out," he says. I go forward, wondering about Finnick, who saved old Mags but will let her eat strange nuts. Who Haymitch has stamped with his seal of approval. Who brought Peeta back from the dead. Why didn't he just let him die? He would have been blameless. I never would have guessed it was in his power to revive him. Why could he possibly have wanted to save Peeta? And why was he so determined to team up with me? Willing to kill me, too, if it comes to that. But leaving the choice of if we fight to me. I keep walking, tossing my nuts, sometimes catching a glimpse of the force field, trying to press to the left to find a spot where we can break through, get away from the Cornucopia, and hopefully find water. But after another hour or so of this I realize it's futile. We're not making any progress to the left. In fact, the force field seems to be herding us along a curved path. I stop and look back at

Mags's limping form, the sheen of

sweat on Peeta's face. "Let's take a break," I say. "I need to get another look from above." The tree I choose seems to jut higher into the air than the others. I make my way up the twisting boughs, staying as close to the trunk as possible. No telling how easily these rubbery branches will snap. Still I climb beyond good sense because there's something I have to see. As I cling to a stretch of trunk no wider than a sapling, swaying back and forth in the humid breeze, my suspicions are confirmed. There's a reason we can't turn to the left, will never be able to. From this precarious vantage point, I can see the shape of the whole arena for the first time. A perfect circle. With a perfect wheel in the middle. The sky above the circumference of the jungle is tinged a uniform pink. And I think I can make out one or two of those wavy squares,
chinks in the armor, Wiress and Beetee called them, because they reveal what was meant to be hidden and are therefore a weakness. Just to make absolutely sure, I shoot an arrow into the empty space above the tree line. There's a spurt of light, a flash of real blue sky, and the arrow's thrown back into the jungle. I climb down to give the others the bad news. "The force field has us trapped in a circle. A dome, really. I don't know how high it goes. There's the Cornucopia, the sea, and then the jungle all around. Very exact. Very symmetrical. And not very large," I say. "Did you see any water?" asks Finnick. "Only the saltwater where we started the Games," I say. "There must be some other source," says Peeta, frowning. "Or we'll all be dead in a matter of days." "Well, the foliage is thick. Maybe there are ponds or springs somewhere," I say doubtfully. I instinctively feel the Capitol might want these unpopular Games over as soon as possible.

Plutarch Heavensbee might have already been given orders to knock us off. "At any rate, there's no point in trying to find out what's over the edge of this hill, because the answer is nothing." "There must be drinkable water between the force field and the wheel," Peeta insists. We all know what this means. Heading back down. Heading back to the Careers and the bloodshed. With Mags hardly able to walk and Peeta too weak to fight. We decide to move down the slope a few hundred yards and continue circling. See if maybe there's some water at that level. I stay in the lead, occasionally chucking a nut to my left, but we're well out of range of the force field now. The sun beats down on us, turning the air to steam, playing tricks on our eyes. By midafternoon, it's clear Peeta and Mags can't go on. Finnick chooses a campsite about ten yards below the force field, saying we can use it as a weapon by deflecting our enemies into it if attacked. Then
he and Mags pull blades of the sharp grass that grows in five-foot-high tufts and begin to weave them together into mats. Since Mags seems to have no ill effects from the nuts, Peeta collects bunches of them

and fries them by bouncing them off the force field. He methodically peels off the shells, piling the meats on a leaf. I stand guard, fidgety and hot and raw with the emotions of the day. Thirsty. I am so thirsty. Finally I can't stand it anymore. "Finnick, why don't you stand guard and I'll hunt around some more for water," I say. No one's thrilled with the idea of me going off alone, but the threat of dehydration hangs over us. "Don't worry, I won't go far," I promise Peeta. "I'll go, too," he says. "No, I'm going to do some hunting if I can," I tell him. I don't add, "And you can't come because you're too loud." But it's implied. He would both scare off

prey and endanger me with his heavy tread. "I won't be long." I move stealthily through the trees, happy to find that the ground lends itself to soundless footsteps. I work my way down at a diagonal, but I find nothing except more lush, green plant life. The sound of the cannon brings me to a halt. The initial bloodbath at the Cornucopia must be over. The death toll of the tributes is now available. I count the shots, each representing one dead victor. Eight. Not as many as last year. But it seems like more since I know most of their names. Suddenly weak, I lean against a tree to rest, feeling the heat draw the moisture from my body like a sponge. Already, swallowing is difficult and fatigue is creeping up on me. I try rubbing my hand across my belly, hoping some sympathetic pregnant woman will become my sponsor and Haymitch can send in some water. No luck. I sink to the ground. In my stillness, I begin to notice the animals:
strange birds with brilliant plumage, tree lizards with flickering blue tongues, and something that looks like a cross between a rat and a possum clinging on the branches close to the trunk. I shoot one of the latter out of a tree to get a closer look. It's ugly, all right, a big rodent with a fuzz of mottled gray fur and two wicked-looking gnawing teeth protruding over its lower lip. As I'm gutting and skinning it, I notice something else. Its muzzle is wet. Like an animal that's been drinking from a stream. Excited, I start at its home tree and move slowly out in a spiral. It can't be far, the creature's water source. Nothing. I find nothing. Not so much as a dewdrop. Eventually, because I know Peeta will be worried about me, I head back to the camp, hotter and more frustrated than ever. When I arrive, I see the others have transformed the place. Mags and Finnick have created a hut of sorts out of the grass mats, open on one side but with

three walls, a floor, and a roof. Mags has also plaited several bowls that Peeta has filled with roasted nuts. Their faces turn to me hopefully, but I give my head a shake. "No. No water. It's out there, though. He knew where it was," I say, hoisting the skinned rodent up for all to see. "He'd been drinking recently when I shot him out of a tree, but I couldn't find his source. I swear, I covered every

inch of ground in a thirty-yard radius." "Can we eat him?" Peeta asks. "I don't know for sure. But his meat doesn't look that different from a squirrel's. He ought to be cooked... ." I hesitate as I think of trying to start a fire out here from complete scratch. Even if I succeed, there's the smoke to think about. We're all so close together in this arena, there's no chance of hiding it. Peeta has another idea. He takes a cube of rodent meat, skewers it on the tip of a pointed stick,
and lets it fall into the force field. There's a sharp sizzle and the stick flies back. The chunk of meat is blackened on the outside but well cooked inside. We give him a round of applause, then quickly stop, remembering where we are.

The white sun sinks in the rosy sky as we gather in the hut. I'm still leery about the nuts, but Finnick says Mags recognized them from another Games. I didn't bother spending time at the edible-plants station in training because it was so effortless for me last year. Now I wish I had. For surely there would have been some of the unfamiliar plants surrounding me. And I might have guessed a bit more about where I was headed. Mags seems fine, though, and she's been eating the nuts for hours. So I pick one up and take a small bite. It has a mild, slightly sweet flavor that reminds me of a chestnut. I decide it's all right. The rodent's strong and

gamey but surprisingly juicy. Really, it's not a bad meal for our first night in the arena. If only we had something to wash it down with. Finnick asks a lot of questions about the rodent, which we decide to call a tree rat. How high was it, how long did I watch it before I shot, and what was it doing? I don't remember it doing much of anything. Snuffling around for insects or something. I'm dreading the night. At least the tightly woven grass offers some protection from whatever slinks across the jungle floor after hours. But a short time before the sun slips below the horizon, a pale white moon rises, making things just visible enough. Our conversation trails off because we know what's coming. We position ourselves in a line at the mouth of the hut and Peeta slips his hand into mine. The sky brightens when the seal of the Capitol appears as if floating in space. As I listen to the strains of the anthem I think, It will be harder
for Finnick and Mags. But it turns out to be plenty hard for me as well. Seeing the faces of the eight dead victors projected into the sky. The man from District 5, the one Finnick took out with his trident, is the first to appear. That means that all the tributes in 1 through 4 are alive -- the four Careers, Beetee and Wiress, and, of course, Mags and Finnick. The man from District 5 is followed by the male morphling from 6, Cecelia and Woof from 8, both from 9, the woman from 10, and Seeder from 11. The Capitol seal is back with a final bit of music and then the sky goes dark except for the moon. No one speaks. I can't pretend I knew any of them well. But I'm thinking of those three kids hanging on to Cecelia when they took her away. Seeder's kindness to me at our meeting. Even the thought of the glazed-eyed morphling painting my cheeks with yellow flowers gives me a pang. All dead. All gone. I don't know how long we might have sat here

if it weren't for the arrival of the silver parachute, which glides down through the foliage to land before us. No one reaches for it. "Whose is it, do you think?" I say finally. "No telling," says Finnick. "Why don't we let Peeta claim it, since he died today?" Peeta unties the cord and flattens out the circle of silk. On the parachute sits a small metal object that I can't place. "What is it?" I ask. No one knows. We

pass it from hand to hand, taking turns examining it. It's a hollow metal tube, tapered slightly at one end. On the other end a small lip curves downward. It's vaguely familiar. A part that could have fallen off a bicycle, a curtain rod, anything, really. Peeta blows on one end to see if it makes a sound. It doesn't. Finnick slides his pinkie into it, testing it out as a weapon. Useless. "Can you fish with it, Mags?" I ask. Mags, who can fish with almost anything, shakes her head
and grunts. I take it and roll it back and forth on my palm. Since we're allies, Haymitch will be working with the District 4 mentors. He had a hand in choosing this gift. That means it's valuable. Lifesaving, even. I think back to last year, when I wanted water so badly, but he wouldn't send it because he knew I could find it if I tried. Haymitch's gifts, or lack thereof, carry weighty messages. I can almost hear him growling at me, Use your brain if you have one. What is it? I wipe the sweat from my eyes and hold the gift out in the moonlight. I move it this way and that, viewing it from different angles, covering portions and then revealing them. Trying to make it divulge its purpose to me. Finally, in frustration, I jam one end into the dirt. "I give up. Maybe if we hook up with Beetee or Wiress they can figure it out. I stretch out, pressing my hot cheek on the grass mat, staring at the thing in aggravation. Peeta rubs a tense spot between

my shoulders and I let myself relax a little. I wonder why this place hasn't cooled off at all now that the sun's gone down. I wonder what's going on back home. Prim. My mother. Gale. Madge. I think of them watching me from home. At least I hope they're at home. Not taken into custody by Thread. Being punished as Cinna is. As Darius is. Punished because of me. Everybody. I begin to ache for them, for my district, for my woods. A decent woods with sturdy hardwood trees, plentiful food, game that isn't creepy. Rushing streams. Cool breezes. No, cold winds to blow this stifling heat away. I conjure up such a wind in my mind, letting it freeze my cheeks and numb my fingers, and all at once, the piece of metal half buried in the black earth has a name. "A spile!" I exclaim, sitting bolt upright. "What?" asks Finnick. I wrestle the thing from the ground and brush it clean. Cup my hand around the tapered end, concealing it,
and look at the lip. Yes, I've seen one of these before. On a cold, windy day long ago, when I was out in the woods with my father. Inserted snugly into a hole drilled in the side of a maple. A pathway for the sap to follow as it flowed into our bucket. Maple syrup could make even our dull bread a treat. After my father died, I didn't know what happened to the handful of spiles he had. Hidden out in the woods somewhere, probably. Never to be found. "It's a spile. Sort of like a faucet. You put it in a tree and sap comes out." I look at the sinewy green trunks around me. "Well, the right

sort of tree." "Sap?" asks Finnick. They don't have the right kind of trees by the sea, either. "To make syrup," says Peeta. "But there must be something else inside these trees." We're all on our feet at once. Our thirst. The lack of springs. The tree rat's sharp front teeth and wet muzzle. There can

only be one thing worth having inside these trees. Finnick goes to hammer the spile into the green bark of a massive tree with a rock, but I stop him. "Wait. You might damage it. We need to drill a hole first," I say. There's nothing to drill with, so Mags offers her awl and Peeta drives it straight into the bark, burying the spike two inches deep. He and Finnick take turns opening up the hole with the awl and the knives until it can hold the spile. I wedge it in carefully and we all stand back in anticipation. At first nothing happens. Then a drop of water rolls down the lip and lands in Mags's palm. She licks it off and holds out her hand for more. By wiggling and adjusting the spile, we get a thin stream running out. We take turns holding our mouths under the tap, wetting our parched tongues. Mags brings over a basket, and the grass is so tightly woven it holds water. We fill the basket and pass it around, taking deep gulps and, later,
luxuriously, splashing our faces clean. Like everything here, the water's on the warm side, but this is no time to be picky. Without our thirst to distract us, we're all aware of how exhausted we are and make preparations for the night. Last year, I always tried to have my gear ready in case I had to make a speedy retreat in the night. This year, there's no backpack to prepare. Just my weapons, which won't leave my grasp, anyway. Then I think of the spile and wrest it from the tree trunk. I strip a tough vine of its leaves, thread it through the hollow center, and tie the spile securely to my belt. Finnick offers to take the first watch and I let him, knowing it has to be one of the two of us until Peeta's rested up. I lie down beside Peeta on the floor of the hut, telling Finnick to wake me when he's tired. Instead I find myself jarred from sleep a few hours later by what seems to be the tolling of a bell. Bong! Bong! It's not exactly like the one they

ring in the Justice Building on New Year's but close enough for me to recognize it. Peeta and Mags sleep through it, but Finnick has the same look of attentiveness I feel. The tolling stops. "I counted twelve," he says. I nod. Twelve. What does that signify? One ring for each district? Maybe. But why? "Mean anything, do you think?" "No idea," he says. We wait for further instructions, maybe a message from Claudius Templesmith. An invitation to a feast. The only thing of note appears in the distance. A dazzling bolt of electricity strikes a towering tree and then a lightning storm begins. I guess it's an indication of rain, of a water source for those who don't have mentors as smart as Haymitch. "Go to sleep, Finnick. It's my

turn to watch, anyway," I say. Finnick hesitates, but no one can stay awake forever. He settles down at the mouth of
the hut, one hand gripped around a trident, and drifts into a restless sleep. I sit with my bow loaded, watching the jungle, which is ghostly pale and green in the moonlight. After an hour or so, the lightning stops. I can hear the rain coming in, though, pattering on the leaves a few hundred yards away. I keep waiting for it to reach us but it never does. The sound of the cannon startles me, although it makes little impression on my sleeping companions. There's no point in awakening them for this. Another victor dead. I don't even allow myself to wonder who it is. The elusive rain shuts off suddenly, like the storm did last year in the arena. Moments after it stops, I see the fog sliding softly in from the direction of the recent downpour. Just a reaction. Cool rain on the steaming ground, I think. It continues to approach at a steady pace. Tendrils reach forward and then curl like fingers, as if they are pulling the rest behind them. As I

watch, I feel the hairs on my neck begin to rise. Something's wrong with this fog. The progression of the front line is too uniform to be natural. And if it's not natural ... A sickeningly sweet odor begins to invade my nostrils and I reach for the others, shouting for them to wake up. In the few seconds it takes to rouse them, I begin to blister. Tiny, searing stabs. Wherever the droplets of mist touch my skin. "Run!" I scream at the others. "Run!" Finnick snaps awake instantly, rising to counter an enemy. But when he sees the wall of fog, he tosses a still-sleeping Mags onto his back and takes off. Peeta is on his feet but not as alert. I grab his arm and begin to propel him through the jungle after Finnick. "What is it? What is it?" he says in bewilderment. "Some kind of fog. Poisonous gas. Hurry, Peeta!" I urge. I can tell that however much he denied it during the day, the aftereffects of hitting the force field have been significant. He's slow, much
slower than usual. And the tangle of vines and undergrowth, which unbalance me occasionally, trip him at every step. I look back at the wall of fog extending in a straight line as far as I can see in either direction. A terrible impulse to flee, to abandon Peeta and save myself, shoots through me. It would be so simple, to run full out, perhaps to even climb a tree above the fog line, which seems to top out at about forty feet. I remember how I did just this when the muttations appeared in the last Games. Took off and only thought of Peeta when I'd reached the Cornucopia. But this time, I trap my terror, push it down, and stay by his side. This time my survival isn't the goal. Peeta's is. I think of the eyes glued to the television screens in the districts, seeing if I will run, as the Capitol wishes, or hold my ground. I lock my fingers tightly into his and say, "Watch my feet. Just try to step where I

step." It helps. We seem to move a little faster, but never enough to afford a rest, and the mist continues to lap at our heels. Droplets spring free of the body of vapor. They burn, but not like fire. Less a sense of heat and more of intense pain as the chemicals find our flesh, cling to it, and burrow down through the layers of skin. Our jumpsuits are no help at all. We may as well be dressed in tissue paper, for all the protection they give. Finnick, who bounded off initially, stops when he realizes we're having problems. But this is not a thing you can fight, only evade. He shouts encouragement, trying to move us along, and the sound of his voice acts as a guide, though little more. Peeta's artificial leg catches in a knot of creepers and he sprawls forward before I can catch him. As I help him up, I become aware of something scarier than the blisters, more debilitating than the burns. The left side of his face has sagged, as if every
muscle in it has died. The lid droops, almost concealing his eye. His mouth

twists in an odd angle toward the ground. "Peeta--" I begin. And that's when I feel the spasms run up my arm. Whatever chemical laces the fog does more than burn -- it targets our nerves. A whole new kind of fear shoots through me and I yank Peeta forward, which only causes him to stumble again. By the time I get him to his feet, both of my arms are twitching uncontrollably. The fog has moved in on us, the body of it less than a yard away. Something is wrong with Peeta's legs; he's trying to walk but they move in a spastic, puppetlike fashion. I feel him lurch forward and realize Finnick has come back for us and is hauling Peeta along. I wedge my shoulder, which still seems under my control, under Peeta's arm and do my best to keep up with

Finnick's rapid pace. We put about ten yards between us and the fog when Finnick stops. "It's no good. I'll have to carry him. Can you take Mags?" he asks me. "Yes," I say stoutly, although my heart sinks. It's true that Mags can't weigh more than about seventy pounds, but I'm not very big myself. Still, I'm sure I've carried heavier loads. If only my arms would stop jumping around. I squat down and she positions herself over my shoulder, the way she rides on Finnick. I slowly straighten my legs and, with my knees locked, I can manage her. Finnick has Peeta slung across his back now and we move forward, Finnick leading, me following in the trail he breaks through the vines. On the fog comes, silent and steady and flat, except for the grasping tendrils. Although my instinct is to run directly away from it, I realize Finnick is moving at a diagonal down the hill. He's trying to keep a distance from the gas while steering us
toward the water that surrounds the Cornucopia. Yes, water, I think as the acid droplets bore deeper into me. Now I'm so thankful I didn't kill Finnick, because how would I have gotten Peeta out of here alive? So thankful to have someone else on my side, even if it's only temporarily. It's not Mags's fault when I begin falling. She's doing everything she can to be an easy passenger, but the fact is, there is only so much weight I can handle. Especially now that my right leg seems to be going stiff. The first two times I crash to the ground, I manage to make it back on my feet, but the third time, I cannot get my leg to cooperate. As I struggle to get up, it gives out and Mags rolls off onto the ground before me. I flail around, trying to use vines and trunks to right myself. Finnick's back by my side, Peeta hanging over him. "It's no use," I say. "Can you take them both? Go on ahead, I'll catch up." A somewhat doubtful proposal, but I say it with as much

surety as I can muster. I can see Finnick's eyes, green in the moonlight. I can see them as clear as day. Almost like a cat's, with a strange reflective quality. Maybe because they are shiny with tears. "No," he says. "I can't carry them both. My arms aren't working." It's true. His arms jerk uncontrollably at his

sides. His hands are empty. Of his three tridents, only one remains, and it's in Peeta's hands. "I'm sorry, Mags. I can't do it." What happens next is so fast, so senseless, I can't even move to stop it. Mags hauls herself up, plants a kiss on Finnick's lips, and then hobbles straight into the fog. Immediately, her body is seized by wild contortions and she falls to the ground in a horrible dance. I want to scream, but my throat is on fire. I take one futile step in her direction when I hear the cannon blast, know her heart has stopped,
that she is dead. "Finnick?" I call out hoarsely, but he has already turned from the scene, already continued his retreat from the fog. Dragging my useless leg behind me, I stagger after him, having no idea what else to do. Time and space lose meaning as the fog seems to invade my brain, muddling my thoughts, making everything unreal. Some deep-rooted animal desire for survival keeps me stumbling after Finnick and Peeta, continuing to move, although I'm probably dead already. Parts of me are dead, or clearly dying. And Mags is dead. This is something I know, or maybe just think I know, because it makes no sense at all. Moonlight glinting on Finnick's bronze hair, beads of searing pain peppering me, a leg turned to wood. I follow Finnick until he collapses on the ground, Peeta still on top of him. I seem to have no ability to stop my own forward motion and simply propel myself onward until I trip over their prone bodies,

just one more on the heap. This is where and how and when we all die, I think. But the thought is abstract and far less alarming than the current agonies of my body. I hear Finnick groan and manage to drag myself off the others. Now I can see the wall of fog, which has taken on a pearly white quality. Maybe it's my eyes playing tricks, or the moonlight, but the fog seems to be transforming. Yes, it's becoming thicker, as if it has pressed up against a glass window and is being forced to condense. I squint harder and realize the fingers no longer protrude from it. In fact, it has stopped moving forward entirely. Like other horrors I have witnessed in the arena, it has reached the end of its territory. Either that or the Gamemakers have decided not to kill us just yet. "It's stopped," I try to say, but only an awful croaking sound comes from my swollen mouth. "It's stopped," I say again, and this time I must be clearer,
because both Peeta and Finnick turn their heads to the fog. It begins to rise upward now, as if being slowly vacuumed into the sky. We watch until it has all been sucked away and not the slightest wisp remains. Peeta rolls off Finnick, who turns over onto his back. We lie there gasping, twitching, our minds and bodies invaded by the poison. After a few minutes pass, Peeta vaguely gestures upward. "Mon-hees." I look up and spot a pair of what I guess are monkeys. I have never seen a live monkey-- there's nothing like that in our woods at home. But I must have seen a

picture, or one in the Games, because when I see the creatures, the same word comes to my mind. I think these have orange fur, although it's hard to tell, and are about half the size of a full-grown human. I take the monkeys for a good sign. Surely they would not hang around if the air was

deadly. For a while, we quietly observe one another, humans and monkeys. Then Peeta struggles to his knees and crawls down the slope. We all crawl, since walking now seems as remarkable a feat as flying; we crawl until the vines turn to a narrow strip of sandy beach and the warm water that surrounds the Cornucopia laps our faces. I jerk back as if I've touched an open flame. Rubbing salt in a wound. For the first time I truly appreciate the expression, because the salt in the water makes the pain of my wounds so blinding I nearly black out. But there's another sensation, of drawing out. I experiment by gingerly placing only my hand in the water. Torturous, yes, but then less so. And through the blue layer of water, I see a milky substance leaching out of the wounds on my skin. As the whiteness diminishes, so does the pain. I unbuckle my belt and strip off my jumpsuit, which is little more than a perforated rag. My shoes and
undergarments are inexplicably unaffected. Little by little, one small portion of a limb at a time, I soak the poison out of my wounds. Peeta seems to be doing the same. But Finnick backed away from the water at first touch and lies facedown on the sand, either unwilling or unable to purge himself. Finally, when I have survived the worst, opening my eyes underwater, sniffing water into my sinuses and snorting it out, and even gargling repeatedly to wash out my throat, I'm functional enough to help Finnick. Some feeling has returned to my leg, but my arms are still riddled with spasms. I can't drag Finnick into the water, and possibly the pain would kill him, anyway. So I scoop up shaky handfuls and empty them on his fists. Since he's not underwater, the poison comes out of his wounds just as it went in, in wisps of fog that I take great care to steer clear of. Peeta recovers enough to help me. He cuts away Finnick's jumpsuit.

Somewhere he finds two shells that work much better than our hands do. We concentrate on soaking Finnick's arms first, since they have been so badly damaged, and even though a lot of white stuff pours out of them, he doesn't notice. He just lies there, eyes shut, giving an occasional moan. I look around with growing awareness of how dangerous a position we're in. It's night, yes, but this moon gives off too much light for concealment. We're lucky no one's attacked us yet. We could see them coming from the Cornucopia, but if all four Careers attacked, they'd overpower us. If they didn't spot us at first, Finnick's moans would give us away soon. "We've got to get more of him into the water," I whisper. But we can't put him in face-first, not while he's in this condition. Peeta nods to Finnick's feet. We

each take one, pull him one hundred and eighty
degrees around, and start to drag him into the saltwater. Just a few inches at a time. His ankles. Wait a few minutes. Up to his midcalf. Wait. His knees. Clouds of white swirl out from his flesh and he groans. We continue to detoxify him, bit by bit. What I find is that the longer I sit in the water, the better I feel. Not just my skin, but my brain and muscle control continue to improve. I can see Peeta's face beginning to return to normal, his eyelid opening, the grimace leaving his mouth. Finnick slowly begins to revive. His eyes open, focus on us, and register awareness that he's being helped. I rest his head on my lap and we let him soak about ten minutes with everything immersed from the neck down. Peeta and I exchange a smile as Finnick lifts his arms above the seawater. "There's just your head left, Finnick. That's the worst part, but you'll feel much better after, if you can bear it," Peeta says. We help him to sit up and let him

grip our hands as he purges his eyes and nose and mouth. His throat is still too raw to speak. "I'm going to try to tap a tree," I say. My fingers fumble at my belt and find the spile still hanging from its vine. "Let me make the hole first," says Peeta. "You stay with him. You're the healer." That's a joke, I think. But I don't say it out loud, since Finnick has enough to deal with. He got the worst of the fog, although I'm not sure why. Maybe because he's the biggest or maybe because he had to exert himself the most. And then, of course, there's Mags. I still don't understand what happened there. Why he essentially abandoned her to carry Peeta. Why she not only didn't question it, but ran straight to her death without a moment's hesitation. Was it because she was so old that her days were numbered, anyway? Did they think that Finnick would stand a better chance of winning if he had Peeta and me as allies? The haggard look on Finnick's face
tells me that now is not the moment to ask. Instead I try to put myself back together. I rescue my mockingjay pin from my ruined jumpsuit and pin it to the strap of my undershirt. The flotation belt must be acid resistant, since it looks as good as new. I can swim, so the flotation belt's not really necessary, but Brutus blocked my arrow with his, so I buckle it back on, thinking it might offer some protection. I undo my hair and comb it with my fingers, thinning it out considerably since the fog droplets damaged it. Then I braid back what's left of it. Peeta has found a good tree about ten yards from the narrow strip of beach. We can hardly see him, but the sound of his knife against the wooden trunk is crystal clear. I wonder what happened to the awl. Mags must've either dropped it or taken it into the fog with her. Anyway, it's gone. I have moved out a bit farther into the shallows, floating alternately on my belly and back. If the seawater

healed Peeta and me, it seems to be transforming

Finnick altogether. He begins to move slowly, just testing his limbs, and gradually begins to swim. But it's not like me swimming, the rhythmic strokes, the even pace. It's like watching some strange sea animal coming back to life. He dives and surfaces, spraying water out of his mouth, rolls over and over in some bizarre corkscrew motion that makes me dizzy even to watch. And then, when he's been underwater so long I feel certain he's drowned, his head pops up right next to me and I start. "Don't do that," I say. "What? Come up or stay under?" he says. "Either. Neither. Whatever. Just soak in the water and behave," I say. "Or if you feel this good, let's go help Peeta." In just the short time it takes to cross to the edge of the jungle, I become aware of the change. Put it down to years of hunting, or maybe my
reconstructed ear does work a little better than anyone intended. But I sense the mass of warm bodies poised above us. They don't need to chatter or scream. The mere breathing of so many is enough. I touch Finnick's arm and he follows my gaze upward. I don't know how they arrived so silently. Perhaps they didn't. We've all been absorbed in restoring our bodies. During that time they've assembled. Not five or ten but scores of monkeys weigh down the limbs of the jungle trees. The pair we spotted when we first escaped the fog felt like a welcoming committee. This crew feels ominous. I arm my bow with two arrows and Finnick adjusts the trident in his hand. "Peeta," I say as calmly as possible. "I need your help with something." "Okay, just a minute. I think I've just about got it," he says, still occupied with the tree. "Yes, there. Have you got the spile?" "I do. But we've found something you'd better take a look at,"

I continue in a measured voice. "Only move toward us quietly, so you don't startle it." For some

reason, I don't want him to notice the monkeys, or even glance their way. There are creatures that interpret mere eye contact as aggression. Peeta turns to us, panting from his work on the tree. The tone of my request is so odd that it's alerted him to some irregularity. "Okay," he says casually. He begins to move through the jungle, and although I know he's trying hard to be quiet, this has never been his strong suit, even when he had two sound legs. But it's all right, he's moving, the monkeys are holding their positions. He's just five yards from the beach when he senses them. His eyes only dart up for a second, but it's as if he's triggered a bomb. The monkeys explode into a shrieking mass of orange fur and converge on him. I've never seen any
animal move so fast. They slide down the vines as if the things were greased. Leap impossible distances from tree to tree. Fangs bared, hackles raised, claws shooting out like switchblades. I may be unfamiliar with monkeys, but animals in nature don't act like this. "Mutts!" I spit out as Finnick and I crash into the greenery. I know every arrow must count, and they do. In the eerie light, I bring down monkey after monkey, targeting eyes and hearts and throats, so that each hit means a death. But still it wouldn't be enough without Finnick spearing the beasts like fish and flinging them aside, Peeta slashing away with his knife. I feel claws on my leg, down my back, before someone takes out the attacker. The air grows heavy with trampled plants, the scent of blood, and the musty stink of the monkeys. Peeta and Finnick and I position ourselves in a triangle, a few yards apart, our backs to one another. My heart sinks as my

fingers draw back my last arrow. Then I remember Peeta has a sheath, too. And he's not shooting, he's hacking away with that knife. My own knife is out now, but the monkeys are quicker, can spring in and out so fast you can barely react. "Peeta!" I shout. "Your arrows!" Peeta turns to see my predicament and is sliding off his sheath when it happens. A monkey lunges out of a tree for his chest. I have no arrow, no way to shoot. I can hear the thud of Finnick's trident finding another mark and know his weapon is occupied. Peeta's knife arm is disabled as he tries to remove the sheath. I throw my knife at the oncoming mutt but the creature somersaults, evading the blade, and stays on its trajectory. Weaponless, defenseless, I do the only thing I can think of. I run for Peeta, to knock him to the ground, to protect his body with mine, even though I know I won't make it in time. She does, though. Materializing, it seems,
from thin air. One moment nowhere, the next reeling in front of Peeta. Already bloody, mouth open in a high-pitched scream, pupils enlarged so her eyes seem like black holes. The insane morphling from District 6 throws up her skeletal arms as if to embrace the monkey, and it sinks its fangs into her chest. Peeta drops the sheath and buries his

knife into the monkey's back, stabbing it again and again until it releases its jaw. He kicks the mutt away, bracing for more. I have his arrows now, a loaded bow, and Finnick at my back, breathing hard but not actively engaged. "Come on, then! Come on!" shouts Peeta, panting with rage. But something has happened to the monkeys. They are withdrawing, backing up trees, fading into the jungle, as if some unheard voice calls them away. A Gamemaker's voice, telling them this is enough. "Get her," I say to Peeta. "We'll

cover you." Peeta gently lifts up the morphling and carries her the last few yards to the beach while Finnick and I keep our weapons at the ready. But except for the orange carcasses on the ground, the monkeys are gone. Peeta lays the morphling on the sand. I cut away the material over her chest, revealing the four deep puncture wounds. Blood slowly trickles from them, making them look far less deadly than they are. The real damage is inside. By the position of the openings, I feel certain the beast ruptured something vital, a lung, maybe even her heart. She lies on the sand, gasping like a fish out of water. Sagging skin, sickly green, her ribs as prominent as a child's dead of starvation. Surely she could afford food, but turned to the morphling just as Haymitch turned to drink, I guess. Everything about her speaks of waste--her body, her life, the vacant look in her eyes. I hold one of her twitching hands, unclear whether it
moves from the poison that affected our nerves, the shock of the attack, or withdrawal from the drug that was her sustenance. There is nothing we can do. Nothing but stay with her while she dies. "I'll watch the trees," Finnick says before walking away. I'd like to walk away, too, but she grips my hand so tightly I would have to pry off her fingers, and I don't have the strength for that kind of cruelty. I think of Rue, how maybe I could sing a song or something. But I don't even know the morphling's name, let alone if she likes songs. I just know she's dying. Peeta crouches down on the other side of her and strokes her hair. When he begins to speak in a soft voice, it seems almost nonsensical, but the words aren't for me. "With my paint box at home, I can make every color imaginable. Pink. As pale as a baby's skin. Or as deep as rhubarb. Green like spring grass. Blue that shimmers like ice on water." The morphling stares into Peeta's eyes, hanging on

to his words. "One time, I spent three days mixing paint until I found the right shade for sunlight on white fur. You see, I kept thinking it was yellow, but it was much more than that. Layers of all sorts of color. One by one," says Peeta. The morphling's breathing is slowing into shallow catch-breaths. Her free hand dabbles in the blood on her chest, making the tiny swirling motions she so loved to paint with. "I haven't figured out a rainbow yet. They come so quickly and leave so soon. I never have enough time to capture them. Just

a bit of blue here or purple there. And then they fade away again. Back into the air," says Peeta. The morphling seems mesmerized by Peeta's words. Entranced. She lifts up a trembling hand and paints what I think might be a flower on Peeta's cheek. "Thank you," he whispers. "That looks beautiful." For a moment, the morphling's face lights up in a
grin and she makes a small squeaking sound. Then her blood-dappled hand falls back onto her chest, she gives one last huff of air, and the cannon fires. The grip on my hand releases. Peeta carries her out into the water. He returns and sits beside me. The morphling floats out toward the Cornucopia for a while, then the hovercraft appears and a four-pronged claw drops, encases her, carries her into the night sky, and she's gone. Finnick rejoins us, his fist full of my arrows still wet with monkey blood. He drops them beside me on the sand. "Thought you might want these." "Thanks," I say. I wade into the water and wash off the gore, from my weapons, my wounds. By the time I return to the jungle to gather some moss to dry them, all the monkeys' bodies have vanished. "Where did they go?" I ask. "We don't know exactly. The vines shifted and they were gone," says Finnick. We stare at the jungle, numb and exhausted. In the quiet, I notice that

the spots where the fog droplets touched my skin have scabbed over. They've stopped hurting and begun to itch. Intensely. I try to think of this as a good sign. That they are healing. I glance over at Peeta, at Finnick, and see they're both scratching at their damaged faces. Yes, even Finnick's beauty has been marred by this night. "Don't scratch," I say, wanting badly to scratch myself. But I know it's the advice my mother would give. "You'll only bring infection. Think it's safe to try for the water again?" We make our way back to the tree Peeta was tapping. Finnick and I stand with our weapons poised while he works the spile in, but no threat appears. Peeta's found a good vein and the water begins to gush from the spile. We slake our thirst, let the warm water pour over our itching bodies. We fill a handful of shells with drinking water and go back to the beach. It's still night, though dawn can't be too many hours away. Unless the Gamemakers want
it to be. "Why don't you two get some rest?" I say. "I'll watch for a while." "No, Katniss, I'd rather," says Finnick. I look in his eyes, at his face, and realize he's barely holding back tears. Mags. The least I can do is give him the privacy to mourn her. "All right, Finnick, thanks," I say. I lie down on the sand with Peeta, who drifts off at once. I stare into the night, thinking of what a difference a day makes. How yesterday morning, Finnick was on my kill list, and now I'm willing to sleep with him as my guard. He saved Peeta and let Mags die and I don't know why. Only that I can never settle the balance owed between us. All I can do at the moment is go to sleep and let him

grieve in peace. And so I do. It's midmorning when I open my eyes again. Peeta's still out beside me. Above us, a mat of grass suspended on branches shields our faces from

the sunlight. I sit up and see that Finnick's hands have not been idle. Two woven bowls are filled with fresh water. A third holds a mess of shellfish. Finnick sits on the sand, cracking them open with a stone. "They're better fresh," he says, ripping a chunk of flesh from a shell and popping it into his mouth. His eyes are still puffy but I pretend not to notice. My stomach begins to growl at the smell of food and I reach for one. The sight of my fingernails, caked with blood, stops me. I've been scratching my skin raw in my sleep. "You know, if you scratch you'll bring on infection," says Finnick. "That's what I've heard," I say. I go into the saltwater and wash off the blood, trying to decide which I hate more, pain or itching. Fed up, I stomp back onto the beach, turn my face upward, and snap, "Hey, Haymitch, if you're not too drunk, we could use a little something for our skin." It's almost funny how quickly the parachute appears above me.
I reach up and the tube lands squarely in my open hand. "About time," I say, but I can't keep the scowl on my face. Haymitch. What I wouldn't give for five minutes of conversation with him. I plunk down on the sand next to Finnick and screw the lid off the tube. Inside is a thick, dark ointment with a pungent smell, a combination of tar and pine needles. I wrinkle my nose as I squeeze a glob of the medicine onto my palm and begin to massage it into my leg. A sound of pleasure slips out of my mouth as the stuff eradicates my itching. It also stains my scabby skin a ghastly gray-green. As I start on the second leg I toss the tube to Finnick, who eyes me doubtfully. "It's like you're decomposing," says Finnick. But I guess the itching wins out, because after a minute Finnick begins to treat his own skin, too. Really, the combination of the scabs and the ointment looks hideous. I can't help enjoying his distress. "Poor

Finnick. Is this the first time in your life you haven't looked pretty?" I say. "It must be. The sensation's completely new. How have you managed it all these years?" he asks. "Just avoid mirrors. You'll forget about it," I say. "Not if I keep looking at you," he says. We slather ourselves down, even taking turns rubbing the ointment into each other's backs where the undershirts don't protect our skin. "I'm going to wake Peeta," I say. "No, wait," says Finnick. "Let's do it together. Put our faces right in front of his." Well, there's so little opportunity for fun left in my life, I agree. We position ourselves on either side of Peeta, lean over until our faces are inches from his nose, and give him a shake. "Peeta. Peeta, wake up," I say in a soft, singsong voice. His eyelids flutter open and then he jumps like we've stabbed him. "Aa!" Finnick and I fall back in the sand,laughing our heads off. Every time we try to stop, we look at Peeta's attempt to maintain a disdainful expression and it sets us off again. By the time we pull ourselves together, I'm thinking that maybe Finnick Odair is all right. At least not as vain or self-important as I'd thought. Not so bad at all,

really. And just as I've come to this conclusion, a parachute lands next to us with a fresh loaf of bread. Remembering from last year how Haymitch's gifts are often timed to send a message, I make a note to myself. Be friends with Finnick. You'll get food. Finnick turns the bread over in his hands, examining the crust. A bit too possessively. It's not necessary. It's got that green tint from seaweed that the bread from District 4 always has. We all know it's his. Maybe he's just realized how precious it is, and that he may never see another loaf again. Maybe some memory of Mags is

associated with the crust. But all he says is, "This will go well with the shellfish." While I help Peeta coat his skin with the ointment, Finnick deftly cleans the meat from the shellfish. We gather round and eat the delicious sweet flesh with the salty bread from District 4. We all look monstrous--the ointment seems to be causing some of the scabs to peel -- but I'm glad for the medicine. Not just because it gives relief from the itching, but also because it acts as protection from that blazing white sun in the pink sky. By its position, I estimate it must be going on ten o'clock, that we've been in the arena for about a day. Eleven of us are dead. Thirteen alive. Somewhere in the jungle, ten are concealed. Three or four are the Careers. I don't really feel like trying to remember who the others are. For me, the jungle has quickly evolved from a place of protection to a sinister trap. I know at some point we'll be forced to reenter
its depths, either to hunt or be hunted, but for right now I'm planning to stick to our little beach. And I don't hear Peeta or Finnick suggesting we do otherwise. For a while the jungle seems almost static, humming, shimmering, but not flaunting its dangers. Then, in the distance, comes screaming. Across from us, a wedge of the jungle begins to vibrate. An enormous wave crests high on the hill, topping the trees and roaring down the slope. It hits the existing seawater with such force that, even though we're as far as we can get from it, the surf bubbles up around our knees, setting our few possessions afloat. Among the three of us, we manage to collect everything before it's carried off, except for our chemical-riddled jumpsuits, which are so eaten away no one cares if we lose them. A cannon fires. We see the hovercraft appear over the area where the wave began and pluck a body from the trees. Twelve, I think. The circle of

water slowly calms down, having absorbed the giant wave. We rearrange our things back on the wet sand and are about to settle down when I see them. Three figures, about two spokes away, stumbling onto the beach. "There," I say quietly, nodding in the newcomers' direction. Peeta and Finnick follow my gaze. As if by previous agreement, we all fade back into the shadows of the jungle. The trio's in bad shape--you can see that right off. One is being practically dragged out by a second, and the third

wanders in loopy circles, as if deranged. They're a solid brick-red color, as if they've been dipped in paint and left out to dry. "Who is that?" asks Peeta. "Or what? Muttations?" I draw back an arrow, readying for an attack. But all that happens is that the one who was being dragged collapses on the beach. The dragger stamps the ground in frustration and,
in an apparent fit of temper, turns and shoves the circling, deranged one over. Finnick's face lights up. "Johanna!" he calls, and runs for the red things. "Finnick!" I hear Johanna's voice reply. I exchange a look with Peeta. "What now?" I ask. "We can't really leave Finnick," he says. "Guess not. Come on, then," I say grouchily, because even if I'd had a list of allies, Johanna Mason would definitely not have been on it. The two of us tromp down the beach to where Finnick and Johanna are just meeting up. As we move in closer, I see her companions, and confusion sets in. That's Beetee on the ground on his back and Wiress who's regained her feet to continue making loops. "She's got Wiress and Beetee." "Nuts and Volts?" says Peeta, equally puzzled. "I've got to hear how this happened." When we reach them, Johanna's gesturing toward the jungle and talking very fast to Finnick. "We thought it was rain, you know, because of the

lightning, and we were all so thirsty. But when it started coming down, it turned out to be blood. Thick, hot blood. You couldn't see, you couldn't speak without getting a mouthful. We just staggered around, trying to get out of it. That's when Blight hit the force field." "I'm sorry, Johanna," says Finnick. It takes a moment to place Blight. I think he was Johanna's male counterpart from District 7, but I hardly remember seeing him. Come to think of it, I don't even think he showed up for training. "Yeah, well, he wasn't much, but he was from home," she says. "And he left me alone with these two." She nudges Beetee, who's barely conscious, with her shoe. "He got a knife in the back at the Cornucopia. And her--" We all look over at Wiress, who's circling around, coated in dried blood, and murmuring, "Tick, tock. Tick, tock." "Yeah, we know. Tick, tock. Nuts is in shock," says Johanna. This seems to draw Wiress in her direction and she
careens into Johanna, who harshly shoves her to the beach. "Just stay down, will you?" "Lay off her," I snap. Johanna narrows her brown eyes at me in hatred. "Lay off her?" she hisses. She steps forward before I can react and slaps me so hard I see stars. "Who do you think got them out of that bleeding jungle for you? You--" Finnick tosses her writhing body over his shoulder and carries her out into the water and repeatedly dunks her while she screams a lot of really insulting things at me. But I don't shoot. Because she's with Finnick and because of what she said, about getting them for me. "What did she mean? She got them for me?" I ask Peeta. "I don't know. You did want them originally," he

reminds me. "Yeah, I did. Originally." But that answers nothing. I look down at Beetee's inert body. "But I won't have them long unless we do something." Peeta lifts Beetee up in

his arms and I take Wiress by the hand and we go back to our little beach camp. I sit Wiress in the shallows so she can get washed up a bit, but she just clutches her hands together and occasionally mumbles, "Tick, tock." I unhook Beetee's belt and find a heavy metal cylinder attached to the side with a rope of vines. I can't tell what it is, but if he thought it was worth saving, I'm not going to be the one who loses it. I toss it up on the sand. Beetee's clothes are glued to him with blood, so Peeta holds him in the water while I loosen them. It takes some time to get the jumpsuit off, and then we find his undergarments are saturated with blood as well. There's no choice but to strip him naked to get him clean, but I have to say this doesn't make much of an impression on me anymore. Our kitchen table's been full of so many naked men this year. You kind of get used to it after a while. We put down Finnick's mat and lay Beetee on his
stomach so we can examine his back. There's a gash about six inches long running from his shoulder blade to below his ribs. Fortunately it's not too deep. He's lost a lot of blood, though--you can tell by the pallor of his skin -- and it's still oozing out of the wound. I sit back on my heels, trying to think. What do I have to work with? Seawater? I feel like my mother when her first line of defense for treating everything was snow. I look over at the jungle. I bet there's a whole pharmacy in there if I knew how to use it. But these aren't my plants. Then I think about the moss Mags gave me to blow my nose. "Be right back," I tell Peeta. Fortunately the stuff seems to be pretty common in the jungle. I rip an armful from the nearby trees and carry it back to the beach. I make a thick pad out of the moss, place it on Beetee's cut, and secure it by tying vines around his body. We get some water into him and then pull him into the shade at the edge of the

jungle. "I think that's all we can do," I say. "It's good. You're good with this healing stuff," he says. "It's in your blood." "No," I say, shaking my head. "I got my father's blood." The kind that quickens during a hunt, not an epidemic. "I'm going to see about Wiress." I take a handful of the moss to use as a rag and join Wiress in the shallows. She doesn't resist as I work off her clothing, scrub the blood from her skin. But her eyes are dilated with fear, and when I speak, she doesn't respond except to say with ever-increasing urgency, "Tick, tock." She does seem to be trying to tell me something, but with no Beetee to explain her thoughts, I'm at a loss. "Yes, tick, tock. Tick, tock," I say. This seems to calm her down a little. I wash out her jumpsuit until there's hardly a trace of blood, and help her back into it. It's not damaged like ours were. Herbelt's fine, so I fasten that on, too. Then I pin her undergarments, along with Beetee's, under some rocks and let them soak. By the time I've rinsed out Beetee's jumpsuit, a shiny clean Johanna and peeling Finnick have joined us. For a while, Johanna gulps water and stuffs herself with shellfish while I try to coax something into Wiress. Finnick tells about the fog and the monkeys in a detached, almost clinical voice, avoiding the most important detail of the story. Everybody offers to guard while the others rest, but in the end, it's Johanna and I who stay up. Me because I'm really rested, she because she simply refuses to lie down. The two of us sit in silence on the beach until the others have gone to sleep. Johanna glances over at Finnick, to be sure, then turns to me. "How'd you lose Mags?" "In the fog. Finnick had Peeta. I had Mags for a while. Then I couldn't lift her. Finnick said he couldn't take them both. She kissed him and walked right

into the poison," I say. "She was Finnick's mentor, you know," Johanna says accusingly. "No, I didn't," I say. "She was half his family," she says a few moments later, but there's less venom behind it. We watch the water lap up over the undergarments. "So what were you doing with Nuts and Volts?" I ask. "I told you -- I got them for you. Haymitch said if we were to be allies I had to bring them to you," says Johanna. "That's what you told him, right?" No, I think. But I nod my head in assent. "Thanks. I appreciate it." "I hope so." She gives me a look filled with loathing, like I'm the biggest drag possible on her life. I wonder if this is what it's like to have an older sister who really hates you. "Tick, tock," I hear behind me. I turn and see Wiress has crawled over. Her eyes are focused on the jungle. "Oh, goody, she's back. Okay, I'm going to sleep. You and Nuts can guard together," Johanna says. She goes over and flings herself down beside Finnick.
"Tick, tock," whispers Wiress. I guide her in front of me and get her to lie down, stroking her arm to soothe her. She drifts off, stirring restlessly, occasionally sighing out her phrase. "Tick, tock." "Tick, tock," I agree softly. "It's time for bed. Tick, tock. Go to sleep." The sun rises in the sky until it's directly over us. It must be noon, I think absently. Not that it matters. Across the water, off to the right, I see the enormous flash as the lightning bolt hits the tree and the electrical storm begins again. Right in the same area it did last night. Someone must have moved into its range, triggered the attack. I sit for a while watching the lightning, keeping Wiress calm, lulled into a sort of peacefulness by the lapping of the water. I think of last night, how the lightning began just after the bell tolled. Twelve bongs. "Tick, tock," Wiress says, surfacing to consciousness for a moment and then going back under. Twelve bongs last night. Like it was

midnight. Then lightning. The sun

overhead now. Like it's noon. And lightning. Slowly I rise up and survey the arena. The lightning there. In the next pie wedge over came the blood rain, where Johanna, Wiress, and Beetee were caught. We would have been in the third section, right next to that, when the fog appeared. And as soon as it was sucked away, the monkeys began to gather in the fourth. Tick, tock. My head snaps to the other side. A couple of hours ago, at around ten, that wave came out of the second section to the left of where the lightning strikes now. At

noon. At midnight. At noon. "Tick, tock," Wiress says in her sleep. As the lightning ceases and the blood rain begins just to the right of it, her words suddenly make sense. "Oh," I
say under my breath. "Tick, tock." My eyes sweep around the full circle of the arena and I know she's right. "Tick, tock. This is a clock." A clock. I can almost see the hands ticking around the twelve-sectioned face of the arena. Each hour begins a new horror, a new Gamemaker weapon, and ends the previous. Lightning, blood rain, fog, monkeys -- those are the first four hours on the clock. And at ten, the wave. I don't know what happens in the other seven, but I know Wiress is right. At present, the blood rain's falling and we're on the beach below the monkey segment, far too close to the fog for my liking. Do the various attacks stay within the confines of the jungle? Not necessarily. The wave didn't. If that fog leaches out of the jungle, or the monkeys return ... "Get up," I order, shaking Peeta and Finnick and Johanna awake. "Get up--we have to move." There's enough time, though, to explain the clock theory to them. About Wiress's

tick-tocking and how the movements of the invisible hands trigger a deadly force in each section. I think I've convinced everyone who's conscious except Johanna, who's naturally opposed to liking anything I suggest. But even she agrees it's better to be safe than sorry. While the others collect our few possessions and get Beetee back into his jumpsuit, I rouse Wiress. She awakes with a panicked "tick, tock!" "Yes, tick, tock, the arena's a clock. It's a clock, Wiress, you were right," I say. "You were right." Relief floods her face -- I guess because somebody has finally understood what she's known probably from the first tolling of the bells. "Midnight." "It starts at midnight," I confirm. A memory struggles to surface in my brain. I see a clock. No, it's a watch, resting in Plutarch Heavensbee's palm. "It starts at midnight," Plutarch said. And then my mockingjay lit up briefly and vanished. In retrospect, it's like he was giving me
a clue about the arena. But why would he? At the time, I was no more a tribute in these Games than he was. Maybe he thought it would help me as a mentor. Or maybe this had been the plan all along. Wiress nods at the blood rain. "One-thirty," she says. "Exactly. One-thirty. And at two, a terrible poisonous fog begins there," I say, pointing at the nearby jungle. "So we have to move somewhere safe now." She smiles and stands up obediently. "Are you thirsty?" I hand her the woven bowl and she gulps down about a quart. Finnick gives her the last bit of bread and she gnaws on it. With the inability to communicate overcome, she's functioning again. I check my weapons. Tie up the spile and the tube of medicine in the parachute and fix it to my belt with vine. Beetee's still pretty out of it, but when Peeta tries to lift him, he objects. "Wire," he says. "She's right

here," Peeta tells him. "Wiress is fine. She's coming, too." But still Beetee struggles. "Wire," he insists. "Oh, I know what he wants," says Johanna impatiently. She crosses the beach and picks up the cylinder we took from his belt when we were bathing him. It's coated in a thick layer of congealed blood. "This worthless thing. It's some kind of wire or something. That's how he got cut. Running up to the Cornucopia to get this. I don't know what kind of weapon it's supposed to be. I guess you could pull off a piece and use it as a garrote or something. But really, can you imagine Beetee garroting somebody?" "He won his Games with wire. Setting up that electrical trap," says Peeta. "It's the best weapon he could have." There's something odd about Johanna not putting this together. Something that doesn't quite ring true. Suspicious. "Seems like you'd have figured that out," I say. "Since you nicknamed him Volts and all."
Johanna's eyes narrow at me dangerously. "Yeah, that was really stupid of me, wasn't it?" she says. "I guess I must have been distracted by keeping your little friends alive. While you were...what, again? Getting Mags killed off?" My fingers tighten on the knife handle at my belt. "Go ahead. Try it. I don't care if you are knocked up, I'll rip your throat out," says Johanna. I know I can't kill her right now. But it's just a matter of time with Johanna and me. Before one of us offs the other. "Maybe we all had better be careful where we step," says Finnick, shooting me a look. He takes the coil and sets it on Beetee's chest. "There's your wire, Volts. Watch where you plug it." Peeta picks up the now-unresisting Beetee. "Where to?" "I'd like to go to the Cornucopia and watch. Just to make sure we're right about the clock," says Finnick. It seems as good a plan as any. Besides, I wouldn't mind the chance of going over the weapons again. And there are six of

us now. Even if you count Beetee and Wiress out, we've got four good fighters. It's so different from where I was last year at this point, doing everything on my own. Yes, it's great to have allies as long as you can ignore the thought that you'll have to kill them. Beetee and Wiress will probably find some way to die on their own. If we have to run from something, how far would they get? Johanna, frankly, I could easily kill if it came down to protecting Peeta. Or maybe even just to shut her up. What I really need is for someone to take out Finnick for me, since I don't think I can do it personally. Not after all he's done for Peeta. I think about maneuvering him into some kind of encounter with the Careers. It's cold, I know. But what are my options? Now that we know about the clock, he probably won't die in the jungle, so someone's going to have to kill him in battle. Because this is so repellent to think about, my mind
frantically tries to change topics. But the only thing that distracts me from my current situation is fantasizing

about killing President Snow. Not very pretty daydreams for a seventeen-year-old girl, I guess, but very satisfying. We walk down the nearest sand strip, approaching the Cornucopia with care, just in case the Careers are concealed there. I doubt they are, because we've been on the beach for hours and there's been no sign of life. The area's abandoned, as I expected. Only the big golden horn and the picked-over pile of weapons remain. When Peeta lays Beetee in the bit of shade the Cornucopia provides, he calls out to Wiress. She crouches beside him and he puts the coil of wire in her hands. "Clean it, will you?" he asks. Wiress nods and scampers over to the water's edge, where she dunks the coil in the water. She starts quietly singing some funny little

song, about a mouse running up a clock. It must be for children, but it seems to make her happy. "Oh, not the song again," says Johanna, rolling her eyes. "That went on for hours before she started tick-tocking." Suddenly Wiress stands up very straight and points to the jungle. "Two," she says. I follow her finger to where the wall of fog has just begun to seep out onto the beach. "Yes, look, Wiress is right. It's two o'clock and the fog has started." "Like clockwork," says Peeta. "You were very smart to figure that out, Wiress." Wiress smiles and goes back to singing and dunking her coil. "Oh, she's more than smart," says Beetee. "She's intuitive." We all turn to look at Beetee, who seems to be coming back to life. "She can sense things before anyone else. Like a canary in one of your coal mines." "What's that?" Finnick asks me. "It's a bird that we take down into the mines to warn us if there's bad air," I say. "What's it do, die?" asks Johanna. "It
stops singing first. That's when you should get out. But if the air's too bad, it dies, yes. And so do you." I don't want to talk about dying songbirds. They bring up thoughts of my father's death and Rue's death and Maysilee Donner's death and my mother inheriting her songbird. Oh, great, and now I'm thinking of Gale, deep down in that horrible mine, with President Snow's threat hanging over his head. So easy to make it look like an accident down there. A silent canary, a spark, and nothing more. I go back to imagining killing the president. Despite her annoyance at Wiress, Johanna's as happy as I've seen her in the arena. While I'm adding to my stock of arrows, she pokes around until she comes up with a pair of lethal-looking axes. It seems an odd choice until I see her throw one with such force it sticks in the sun-softened gold of the Cornucopia. Of course. Johanna Mason. District 7. Lumber. I bet she's been tossing around axes since she

could toddle. It's like Finnick with his trident. Or Beetee with his wire. Rue with her knowledge of plants. I realize it's just another disadvantage the District 12 tributes have faced over the years. We don't go down in the mines until we're eighteen. It looks like

most of the other tributes learn something about their trades early on. There are things you do in a mine that could come in handy in the Games. Wielding a pick. Blowing things up. Give you an edge. The way my hunting did. But we learn them too late. While I've been messing with the weapons, Peeta's been squatting on the ground, drawing something with the tip of his knife on a large, smooth leaf he brought from the jungle. I look over his shoulder and see he's creating a map of the arena. In the center is the Cornucopia on its circle of sand with the twelve strips branching out
from it. It looks like a pie sliced into twelve equal wedges. There's another circle representing the waterline and a slightly larger one indicating the edge of the jungle. "Look how the Cornucopia's positioned," he says to me. I examine the Cornucopia and see what he means. "The tail points toward twelve o'clock," I say. "Right, so this is the top of our clock," he says, and quickly scratches the numbers one through twelve around the clock face. "Twelve to one is the lightning zone." He writes lightning in tiny print in the corresponding wedge, then works clockwise adding blood, fog, and monkeys in the following sections. "And ten to eleven is the wave," I say. He adds it. Finnick and Johanna join us at this point, armed to the teeth with tridents, axes, and knives. "Did you notice anything unusual in the others?" I ask Johanna and Beetee, since they might have seen something we didn't. But all they've seen is a lot of blood. "I

guess they could hold anything." "I'm going to mark the ones where we know the Gamemakers' weapon follows us out past the jungle, so we'll stay clear of those," says Peeta, drawing diagonal lines on the fog and wave beaches. Then he sits back. "Well, it's a lot more than we knew this morning, anyway." We all nod in agreement, and that's when I notice it. The silence. Our canary has stopped singing. I don't wait. I load an arrow as I twist and get a glimpse of a dripping-wet Gloss letting Wiress slide to the ground, her throat slit open in a bright red smile. The point of my arrow disappears into his right temple, and in the instant it takes to reload, Johanna has buried an ax blade in Cashmere's chest. Finnick knocks away a spear Brutus throws at Peeta and takes Enobaria's knife in his thigh. If there wasn't a Cornucopia to duck behind, they'd be dead, both of the tributes from District 2. I spring forward in pursuit. Boom! Boom! Boom!
The cannon confirms there's no way to help Wiress, no need to finish off Gloss or Cashmere. My allies and I are rounding the horn, starting to give chase to Brutus and Enobaria, who are sprinting down a sand strip toward the jungle. Suddenly the ground jerks beneath my feet and I'm flung on my side in the sand. The circle of land that holds the Cornucopia starts spinning fast, really fast, and I can see the jungle going by in a blur. I feel the centrifugal force pulling me toward the

water and dig my hands and feet into the sand, trying to get some purchase on the unstable ground. Between the flying sand and the dizziness, I have to squeeze my eyes shut. There is literally nothing I can do but hold on until, with no deceleration, we slam to a stop. Coughing and queasy, I sit up slowly to find my companions in the same condition. Finnick, Johanna, and Peeta have hung on. The

three dead bodies have been tossed out into the seawater.

The whole thing, from missing Wiress's song to now, can't have taken more than a minute or two. We sit there panting, scraping the sand out of our mouths. "Where's Volts?" says Johanna. We're on our feet. One wobbly circle of the Cornucopia confirms he's gone. Finnick spots him about twenty yards out in the water, barely keeping afloat, and swims out to haul him in. That's when I remember the wire and how important it was to him. I look frantically around. Where is it? Where is it? And then I see it, still clutched in Wiress's hands, far out in the water. My stomach contracts at the thought of what I must do next. "Cover me," I say to the others. I toss aside my weapons and race down the strip closest to her body. Without slowing down, I dive into the water and start for her. Out of the corner of my eye, I can see
the hovercraft appearing over us, the claw starting to descend to take her away. But I don't stop. I just keep swimming as hard as I can and end up slamming into her body. I come up gasping, trying to avoid swallowing the bloodstained water that spreads out from the open wound in her neck. She's floating on her back, borne up by her belt and death, staring into that relentless sun. As I tread water, I have to wrench the coil of wire from her fingers, because her final grip on it is so tight. There's nothing I can do then but close her eyelids, whisper good-bye, and swim away. By the time I swing the coil up onto the sand and pull myself from the water, her body's gone. But I can still taste her blood mingled with the sea salt. I walk back to the Cornucopia. Finnick's gotten Beetee back alive, although a little waterlogged, sitting up and snorting out water. He had the good sense to hang on to his glasses, so at least he can see. I

place the reel of wire on his lap. It's sparkling clean, no blood left at all. He unravels a piece of the wire and runs it through his fingers. For the first time I see it, and it's unlike any wire I know. A pale golden color and as fine as a piece of hair. I wonder how long it is. There must be miles of the stuff to fill the large spool. But I don't ask, because I know he's thinking of Wiress. I look at the others' sober faces. Now Finnick, Johanna, and Beetee have all lost their district partners. I cross to Peeta and wrap my arms around him, and for a while we all stay silent. "Let's get off this stinking island," Johanna says finally. There's only the matter of our weapons now, which we've largely retained. Fortunately the vines here are strong and the spile and tube of medicine wrapped in the parachute are still secured to my belt. Finnick strips off his undershirt and ties it around the wound Enobaria's knife made in his thigh; it's not deep. Beetee thinks
he can walk now, if we go slowly, so I help him up. We decide to head to the beach at twelve o'clock. That should provide hours of calm and keep us clear of any poisonous residue. And then Peeta, Johanna, and Finnick head off in

three different directions. "Twelve o'clock, right?" says Peeta. "The tail points at twelve." "Before they spun us," says Finnick. "I was judging by the sun." "The sun only tells you it's going on four, Finnick," I say. "I think Katniss's point is, knowing the time doesn't mean you necessarily know where four is on the clock. You might have a general idea of the direction. Unless you consider that they may have shifted the outer ring of jungle as well," says Beetee. No, Katniss's point was a lot more basic than that. Beetee's articulated a theory far beyond my comment on the sun. But I just nod my head like I've been on the same page all along. "Yes, so

any one of these paths could lead to twelve o'clock," I say. We circle around the Cornucopia, scrutinizing the jungle. It has a baffling uniformity. I remember the tall tree that took the first lightning strike at twelve o'clock, but every sector has a similar tree. Johanna thinks to follow Enobaria's and Brutus's tracks, but they have been blown or washed away. There's no way to tell where anything is. "I should have never mentioned the clock," I say bitterly. "Now they've taken that advantage away as well." "Only temporarily," says Beetee. "At ten, we'll see the wave again and be back on track." "Yes, they can't redesign the whole arena," says Peeta. "It doesn't matter," says Johanna impatiently. "You had to tell us or we never would have moved our camp in the first place, brainless." Ironically, her logical, if demeaning, reply is the only one that comforts me. Yes, I had to tell them to get them to move. "Come on, I need
water. Anyone have a good gut feeling?" We randomly choose a path and take it, having no idea what number we're headed for. When we reach the jungle, we peer into it, trying to decipher what may be waiting inside. "Well, it must be monkey hour. And I don't see any of them in there," says Peeta. "I'm going to try to tap a tree." "No, it's my turn," says Finnick. "I'll at least watch your back," Peeta says. "Katniss can do that," says Johanna. "We need you to make another map. The other washed away." She yanks a large leaf off a tree and hands it to him. For a moment, I'm suspicious they're trying to divide and kill us. But it doesn't make sense. I'll have the advantage on Finnick if he's dealing with the tree and Peeta's much bigger than Johanna. So I follow Finnick about fifteen yards into the jungle, where he finds a good tree and starts stabbing to make a hole with his knife. As I stand there, weapons ready, I can't lose the uneasy feeling

that something is going on and that it has to do with Peeta. I retrace our steps, starting from the moment the gong rang out, searching for the source of my discomfort. Finnick towing Peeta in off his metal plate. Finnick reviving Peeta after the force field stopped his heart. Mags running into the fog so that Finnick could carry Peeta. The morphling hurling herself in front of him to block the

monkey's attack. The fight with the Careers was so quick, but didn't Finnick block Brutus's spear from hitting Peeta even though it meant taking Enobaria's knife in his leg? And even now Johanna has him drawing a map on a leaf rather than risking the jungle... There is no question about it. For reasons completely unfathomable to me, some of the other victors are trying to keep him alive, even if it means sacrificing themselves. I'm dumbfounded. For one thing,
that's my job. For another, it doesn't make sense. Only one of us can get out. So why have they chosen Peeta to protect? What has Haymitch possibly said to them, what has he bargained with to make them put Peeta's life above their own? I know my own reasons for keeping Peeta alive. He's my friend, and this is my way to defy the Capitol, to subvert its terrible Games. But if I had no real ties to him, what would make me want to save him, to choose him over myself? Certainly he is brave, but we have all been brave enough to survive a Games. There is that quality of goodness that's hard to overlook, but still ... and then I think of it, what Peeta can do so much better than the rest of us. He can use words. He obliterated the rest of the field at both interviews. And maybe it's because of that underlying goodness that he can move a crowd--no, a country--to his side with the turn of a simple sentence. I remember thinking that was the gift the

leader of our revolution should have. Has Haymitch convinced the others of this? That Peeta's tongue would have far greater power against the Capitol than any physical strength the rest of us could claim? I don't know. It still seems like a really long leap for some of the tributes. I mean, we're talking about Johanna Mason here. But what other explanation can there be for their decided efforts to keep him alive? "Katniss, got that spile?" Finnick asks, snapping me back to reality. I cut the vine that ties the spile to my belt and hold the metal tube out to him. That's when I hear the scream. So full of fear and pain it ices my blood. And so familiar. I drop the spile, forget where I am or what lies ahead, only know I must reach her, protect her. I run wildly in the direction of the voice, heedless of danger, ripping through vines and branches, through anything that keeps me from reaching her. From reaching my little sister. Where is
she? What are they doing to her? "Prim!" I cry out. "Prim!" Only another agonized scream answers me. How did she get here? Why is she part of the Games? "Prim!" Vines cut into my face and arms, creepers grab my feet. But I am getting closer to her. Closer. Very close now. Sweat pours down my face, stinging the healing acid wounds. I pant, trying to get some use out of the warm, moist air that seems empty of oxygen. Prim makes a sound -- such a lost, irretrievable sound--that I can't even imagine what they have done to evoke it. "Prim!" I rip through a wall of green into a small clearing and the

sound repeats directly above me. Above me? My head whips back. Do they have her up in the trees? I desperately search the branches but see nothing. "Prim?" I say pleadingly. I hear her but can't see her. Her next wail rings

out, clear as a bell, and there's no mistaking the source. It's coming from the mouth of a small, crested black bird perched on a branch about ten feet over my head. And then I understand. It's a jabberjay. I've never seen one before -- I thought they no longer existed--and for a moment, as I lean against the trunk of the tree, clutching the stitch in my side, I examine it. The muttation, the forerunner, the father. I pull up a mental image of a mockingbird, fuse it with the jabberjay, and yes, I can see how they mated to make my mockingjay. There is nothing about the bird that suggests it's a mutt. Nothing except the horribly lifelike sounds of Prim's voice streaming from its mouth. I silence it with an arrow in its throat. The bird falls to the ground. I remove my arrow and wring its neck for good measure. Then I hurl the revolting thing into the jungle. No degree of hunger would ever tempt me to eat it. It wasn't real, I tell myself. The same
way the muttation wolves last year weren't really the dead tributes. It's just a sadistic trick of the Gamemakers. Finnick crashes into the clearing to find me wiping my arrow clean with some moss. "Katniss?" "It's okay. I'm okay," I say, although I don't feel okay at all. "I thought I heard my sister but--" The piercing shriek cuts me off. It's another voice, not Prim's, maybe a young woman's. I don't recognize it. But the effect on Finnick is instantaneous. The color vanishes from his face and I can actually see his pupils dilate in fear. "Finnick, wait!" I say, reaching out to reassure him, but he's bolted away. Gone off in pursuit of the victim, as mindlessly as I pursued Prim. "Finnick!" I call, but I know he won't turn back and wait for me to give a rational explanation. So all I can do is follow him. It's no effort to track him, even though he's moving so fast, since he leaves a clear, trampled path in his wake. But the bird is at least a quarter mile away, most of

it uphill, and by the time I reach him, I'm winded. He's circling around a giant tree. The trunk must be four feet in diameter and the limbs don't even begin until twenty feet up. The woman's shrieks emanate from somewhere in the foliage, but the jabberjay's concealed. Finnick's screaming as well, over and over. "Annie! Annie!" He's in a state of panic and completely unreachable, so I do what I would do anyway. I scale an adjacent tree, locate the jabberjay, and take it out with an arrow. It falls straight down, landing right at Finnick's feet. He picks it up, slowly making the connection, but when I slide down to join him, he looks more despairing than ever. "It's all right, Finnick. It's just a jabberjay. They're playing a trick on us," I say. "It's not real. It's not your ... Annie." "No,

it's not Annie. But the voice was hers. Jabberjays
mimic what they hear. Where did they get those screams, Katniss?" he says. I can feel my own cheeks grow pale as I understand his meaning. "Oh, Finnick, you don't think they ..." "Yes. I do. That's exactly what I think," he says. I have an image of Prim in a white room, strapped to a table, while masked, robed figures elicit those sounds from her. Somewhere they are torturing her, or did torture her, to get those sounds. My knees turn to water and I sink to the ground. Finnick is trying to tell me something, but I can't hear him. What I do finally hear is another bird starting up somewhere off to my left. And this time, the voice is Gale's. Finnick catches my arm before I can run. "No. It's not him." He starts pulling me downhill, toward the beach. "We're getting out of here!" But Gale's voice is so full of pain I can't help struggling to reach it. "It's not him, Katniss! It's a mutt!" Finnick shouts at me. "Come on!" He moves me along, half

dragging, half carrying me, until I can process what he said. He's right, it's just another jabberjay. I can't help Gale by chasing it down. But that doesn't change the fact that it is Gale's voice, and somewhere, sometime, someone has made him sound like this. I stop fighting Finnick, though, and like the night in the fog, I flee what I can't fight. What can only do me harm. Only this time it's my heart and not my body that's

disintegrating. This must be another weapon of the clock. Four o'clock, I guess. When the hands tick-tock onto the four, the monkeys go home and the jabberjays come out to play. Finnick is right--getting out of here is the only thing to do. Although there will be nothing Haymitch can send in a parachute that will help either Finnick or me recover from the wounds the birds have inflicted. I catch sight of Peeta and Johanna standing at the tree line and I'm filled with a
mixture of relief and anger. Why didn't Peeta come to help me? Why did no one come after us? Even now he hangs back, his hands raised, palms toward us, lips moving but no words reaching us. Why?, The wall is so transparent, Finnick and I run smack into it and bounce back onto the jungle floor. I'm lucky. My shoulder took the worst of the impact, whereas Finnick hit face-first and now his nose is gushing blood. This is why Peeta and Johanna and even Beetee, who I see sadly shaking his head behind them, have not come to our aid. An invisible barrier blocks the area in front of us. It's not a force field. You can touch the hard, smooth surface all you like. But Peeta's knife and Johanna's ax can't make a dent in it. I know, without checking more than a few feet to one side, that it encloses the entire four-to-five-o'clock wedge. That we will be trapped like rats until the hour passes. Peeta presses his hand against the surface and I put my own up to

meet it, as if I can feel him through the wall. I see his lips moving but I can't hear him, can't hear anything outside our wedge. I try to make out what he's saying, but I can't focus, so I just stare at his face, doing my best to hang on to my sanity. Then the birds begin to arrive. One by one. Perching in the surrounding branches. And a carefully orchestrated chorus of horror begins to spill out of their mouths. Finnick gives up at once, hunching on the ground, clenching his hands over his ears as if he's trying to crush his skull. I try to fight for a while. Emptying my quiver of arrows into the hated birds. But every time one drops dead, another quickly takes its place. And finally I give up and curl up beside Finnick, trying to block out the excruciating sounds of Prim, Gale, my mother, Madge, Rory, Vick, even Posy, helpless little Posy... I know it's stopped when I feel Peeta's hands on me, feel myself lifted from the ground and out of
the jungle. But I stay eyes squeezed shut, hands over my ears, muscles too rigid to release. Peeta holds me on his lap, speaking soothing words, rocking me gently. It takes a long time before I begin to relax the iron grip on my body. And when I do, the trembling begins. "It's all right, Katniss," he whispers. "You didn't hear them," I answer. "I heard Prim. Right in the beginning. But it wasn't her," he says. "It was a jabberjay." "It was her. Somewhere. The jabberjay just recorded it," I say. "No, that's what they want you to think. The same way I wondered if Glimmer's

eyes were in that mutt last year. But those weren't Glimmer's eyes. And that wasn't Prim's voice. Or if it was, they took it from an interview or something and distorted the sound. Made it say whatever she was saying," he says. "No, they were torturing her," I answer. "She's probably

dead." "Katniss, Prim isn't dead. How could they kill Prim? We're almost down to the final eight of us. And what happens then?" Peeta says. "Seven more of us die," I say hopelessly. "No, back home. What happens when they reach the final eight tributes in the Games?" He lifts my chin so I have to look at him. Forces me to make eye contact. "What happens? At the final eight?" I know he's trying to help me, so I make myself think. "At the final eight?" I repeat. "They interview your family and friends back home." "That's right," says Peeta. "They interview your family and friends. And can they do that if they've killed them all?" "No?" I ask, still unsure. "No. That's how we know Prim's alive. She'll be the first one they interview, won't she?" he asks. I want to believe him. Badly. It's just ... those voices ... "First Prim. Then your mother. Your cousin, Gale. Madge," he continues. "It was a trick, Katniss. A horrible one. But we're the only ones who
can be hurt by it. We're the ones in the Games. Not them." "You really believe that?" I say. "I really do," says Peeta. I waver, thinking of how Peeta can make anyone believe anything. I look over at Finnick for confirmation, see he's fixated on Peeta, his words. "Do you believe it, Finnick?" I ask. "It could be true. I don't know," he says. "Could they do that, Beetee? Take someone's regular voice and make it ..." "Oh, yes. It's not even that difficult, Finnick. Our children learn a similar technique in school," says Beetee. "Of course Peeta's right. The whole country adores Katniss's little sister. If they really killed her like this, they'd probably have an uprising on their hands," says Johanna flatly. "Don't want that, do they?" She throws back her head and shouts, "Whole country in rebellion? Wouldn't want anything like that!" My mouth drops open in shock. No one, ever, says anything like this in the Games. Absolutely, they've cut away from

Johanna, are editing her out. But I have heard her and can never think about her again in the same way. She'll never win any awards for kindness, but she certainly is gutsy. Or crazy. She picks up some shells and heads toward the jungle. "I'm getting water," she says. I can't help catching her hand as she passes me. "Don't go in there. The birds--" I remember the birds must be gone, but I still don't want anyone in there. Not even her. "They can't hurt me. I'm not like the rest of you. There's no one left I love," Johanna says, and frees her hand with an impatient shake. When she brings me back a shell of water, I take it with a silent nod of thanks, knowing how much she would despise the pity in my voice. While Johanna

collects water and my arrows, Beetee fiddles with his wire, and Finnick takes to the water. I need to clean up, too,
but I stay in Peeta's arms, still too shaken to move. "Who did they use against Finnick?" he asks. "Somebody named Annie," I say. "Must be Annie Cresta," he says. "Who?" I ask. "Annie Cresta. She was the girl Mags volunteered for. She won about five years ago," says Peeta. That would have been the summer after my father died, when I first began feeding my family, when my whole being was occupied with battling starvation. "I don't remember those Games much," I say. "Was that the earthquake year?" "Yeah. Annie's the one who went mad when her district partner got beheaded. Ran off by herself and hid. But an earthquake broke a dam and most of the arena got flooded. She won because she was the best swimmer," says Peeta. "Did she get better after?" I ask. "I mean, her mind?" "I don't know. I don't remember ever seeing her at the Games again. But she didn't look too stable during the reaping this year," says Peeta. So that's who

Finnick loves, I think. Not his string of fancy lovers in the Capitol. But a poor, mad girl back home. A cannon blast brings us all together on the beach. A hovercraft appears in what we estimate to be the six-to-seven-o'clock zone. We watch as the claw dips down five different times to retrieve the pieces of one body, torn apart. It's impossible to tell who it was. Whatever happens at six o'clock, I never want to know. Peeta draws a new map on a leaf, adding a JJ for jabberjays in the four-to-five-o'clock section and simply writing beast in the one where we saw the tribute collected in pieces. We now have a good idea of what seven of the hours will bring. And if there's any positive to the jabberjay attack, it's that it let us know where we are on the clock face again. Finnick weaves yet another water basket and a net for fishing. I take a quick swim and put more ointment on my skin. Then I sit at the edge of the water, cleaning the fish
Finnick catches and watching the sun drop below the horizon. The bright moon is already on the rise, filling the arena with that strange twilight. We're about to settle down to our meal of raw fish when the anthem begins. And then the faces ... Cashmere. Gloss. Wiress. Mags. The woman from District 5. The morphling who gave her life for Peeta. Blight. The man from 10. Eight dead. Plus eight from the first night. Two-thirds of us gone in a day and a half. That must be some kind of record. "They're really burning through us," says Johanna. "Who's left? Besides us five and District Two?" asks Finnick. "Chaff," says Peeta, without needing to think about it. Perhaps he's been keeping an eye out for him because of Haymitch. A parachute comes down with a pile of bite-sized square-shaped rolls. "These are from your district, right, Beetee?" Peeta asks. "Yes, from District Three," he says. "How many are there?" Finnick counts

them, turning each one over in his hands before he sets it in a neat configuration. I don't know what it is with Finnick and bread, but he seems obsessed with handling it. "Twenty-four," he says. "An even two dozen, then?" says Beetee. "Twenty-four on the nose," says Finnick. "How should we divide them?" "Let's each have three, and whoever is still alive at breakfast can take a vote on the rest," says Johanna. I don't know why this makes me laugh a little. I guess because it's true. When I do, Johanna gives me a look that's almost approving. No, not approving. But maybe slightly pleased. We wait until the giant wave has flooded out of the ten-to-eleven-o'clock section, wait for the water to recede, and then go to that beach to make camp. Theoretically, we should have a full twelve hours of safety from the jungle. There's an unpleasant chorus of clicking, probably from some evil type of insect, coming from the
eleven-to-twelve-o'clock wedge. But whatever is making the sound stays within the confines of the jungle and we keep off that part of the beach in case they're just waiting for a carelessly placed footfall to swarm out. I don't know how Johanna's still on her feet. She's only had about an hour of sleep since the Games started. Peeta and I volunteer for the first watch because we're better rested, and because we want some time alone. The others go out immediately, although Finnick's sleep is restless. Every now and then I hear him murmuring Annie's name. Peeta and I sit on the damp sand, facing away from each other, my right shoulder and hip pressed against his. I watch the water as he watches the jungle, which is better for me. I'm still haunted by the voices of the jabberjays, which unfortunately the insects can't drown out. After a while I rest my head against his shoulder. Feel his hand caress my hair. "Katniss," he says

softly, "it's no use pretending we don't know what the other one is trying to do." No, I guess there isn't, but it's no fun discussing it, either. Well, not for us, anyway. The Capitol viewers will be glued to their sets so they don't miss one wretched word. "I don't know what kind of deal you think you've made with Haymitch, but you should know he made me promises as well." Of course, I know this, too. He told Peeta they could keep me alive so that he wouldn't be suspicious. "So I think we can assume he was lying to one of us." This gets my attention. A double deal. A double promise. With only Haymitch knowing which one is real. I raise my head, meet Peeta's eyes. "Why are you saying this now?"

"Because I don't want you forgetting how different our circumstances are. If you die, and I live, there's no life for me at all back in District Twelve. You're my whole life," he
says. "I would never be happy again." I start to object but he puts a finger to my lips. "It's different for you. I'm not saying it wouldn't be hard. But there are other people who'd make your life worth living." Peeta pulls the chain with the gold disk from around his neck. He holds it in the moonlight so I can clearly see the mockingjay. Then his thumb slides along a catch I didn't notice before and the disk pops open. It's not solid, as I had thought, but a locket. And within the locket are photos. On the right side, my mother and Prim, laughing. And on the left, Gale. Actually smiling. There is nothing in the world that could break me faster at this moment than these three faces. After what I heard this afternoon ... it is the perfect weapon. "Your family needs you, Katniss," Peeta says. My family. My mother. My sister. And my pretend cousin Gale. But Peeta's intention is clear. That Gale really is my family, or will be one day, if I live.

That I'll marry him. So Peeta's giving me his life and Gale at the same time. To let me know I shouldn't ever have doubts about it. Everything. That's what Peeta wants me to take from him. I wait for him to mention the baby, to play to the cameras, but he doesn't. And that's how I know that none of this is part of the Games. That he is telling me the truth about what he feels. "No one really needs me," he says, and there's no self-pity in his voice. It's true his family doesn't need him. They will mourn him, as will a handful of friends. But they will get on. Even Haymitch, with the help of a lot of white liquor, will get on. I realize only one person will be damaged beyond repair if Peeta dies. Me. "I do," I say. "I need you." He looks upset, takes a deep breath as if to begin a long argument, and that's no good, no good at all, because he'll start going on about Prim and my mother and everything and I'll just get confused. So before he can talk, I
stop his lips with a kiss. I feel that thing again. The thing I only felt once before. In the cave last year, when I was trying to get Haymitch to send us food. I kissed Peeta about a thousand times during those Games and after. But there was only one kiss that made me feel something stir deep inside. Only one that made me want more. But my head wound started bleeding and he made me lie down. This time, there is nothing but us to interrupt us. And after a few attempts, Peeta gives up on talking. The sensation inside me grows warmer and spreads out from my chest, down through my body, out along my arms and legs, to the tips of my being. Instead of satisfying me, the kisses have the opposite effect, of making my need greater. I thought I was something of an expert on hunger, but this is an entirely new kind. It's the first crack of the lightning

storm--the bolt hitting the tree at midnight--that brings us to our senses. It rouses Finnick as well. He sits up with a sharp cry. I see his fingers digging into the sand as he reassures himself that whatever nightmare he inhabited wasn't real. "I can't sleep anymore," he says. "One of you should rest." Only then does he seem to notice our expressions, the way we're wrapped around each other. "Or both of you. I can watch alone." Peeta won't let him, though. "It's too dangerous," he says. "I'm not tired. You lie down, Katniss." I don't object because I do need to sleep if I'm to be of any use keeping him alive. I let him lead me over to where the others are. He puts the chain with the locket around my neck, then rests his hand over the spot where our baby would be. "You're going to make a great mother, you know," he says. He kisses me one last time and goes back to Finnick. His reference to the baby signals that our time-out from the
Games is over. That he knows the audience will be wondering why he hasn't used the most persuasive argument in his arsenal. That sponsors must be manipulated. But as I stretch out on the sand I wonder, could it be more? Like a reminder to me that I could still one day have kids with Gale? Well, if that was it, it was a mistake. Because for one thing, that's never been part of my plan. And for another, if only one of us can be a parent, anyone can see it should be Peeta. As I drift off, I try to imagine that world, somewhere in the future, with no Games, no Capitol. A place like the meadow in the song I sang to Rue as she died. Where Peeta's child could be safe. When I wake, I have a brief, delicious feeling of happiness that is somehow connected with Peeta. Happiness, of course, is a complete absurdity at this point, since at the rate things are going, I'll be dead in a day. And that's the best-case scenario, if I'm able to eliminate the rest

of the field, including myself, and get Peeta crowned as the winner of the Quarter Quell. Still, the sensation's so unexpected and sweet I cling to it, if only for a few moments. Before the gritty sand, the hot sun, and my itching skin demand a return to reality. Everyone's already up and watching the descent of a parachute to the beach. I join them for another delivery of bread. It's identical to the one we received the night before. Twenty-four rolls from District 3. That gives us thirty-three in all. We each take five, leaving eight in reserve. No one says it, but eight will divide up perfectly after the next death. Somehow, in the light of day, joking about who will be around to eat the rolls has lost its humor. How long can we keep this alliance? I don't think anyone expected the number of tributes to drop so quickly. What if I am wrong about the others protecting Peeta? If things were simply coincidental, or it's all been a strategy to
win our trust to make us easy prey, or I don't understand what's actually going on? Wait, there's no

ifs about that. I don't understand what's going on. And if I don't, it's time for Peeta and me to clear out of here. I sit next to Peeta on the sand to eat my rolls. For some reason, it's difficult to look at him. Maybe it was all that kissing last night, although the two of us kissing isn't anything new. It might not even have felt any different for him. Maybe it's knowing the brief amount of time we have left. And how we're working at such cross- purposes when it comes to who should survive these Games. After we eat, I take his hand and tug him toward the water. "Come on. I'll teach you how to swim." I need to get him away from the others where we can discuss breaking away. It will be tricky, because once they realize we're severing the alliance, we'll be instant

targets. If I was really teaching him to swim, I'd make him take off the belt since it keeps him afloat, but what does it matter now? So I just show him the basic stroke and let him practice going back and forth in waist-high water. At first, I notice Johanna keeping a careful eye on us, but eventually she loses interest and goes to take a nap. Finnick's weaving a new net out of vines and Beetee plays with his wire. I know the time has come. While Peeta has been swimming, I've discovered something. My remaining scabs are starting to peel off. By gently rubbing a handful of sand up and down my arm, I clean off the rest of the scales, revealing fresh new skin underneath. I stop Peeta's practice, on the pretext of showing him how to rid himself of the itchy scabs, and as we scrub ourselves, I bring up our escape. "Look, the pool is down to eight. I think it's time we took off," I say under my breath, although I doubt any of the tributes
can hear me. Peeta nods, and I can see him considering my proposition. Weighing if the odds will be in our favor. "Tell you what," he says. "Let's stick around until Brutus and Enobaria are dead. I think Beetee's trying to put together some kind of trap for them now. Then, I promise, we'll go." I'm not entirely convinced. But if we leave now, we'll have two sets of adversaries after us. Maybe three, because who knows what Chaff's up to? Plus the clock to contend with. And then there's Beetee to think of. Johanna only brought him for me, and if we leave she'll surely kill him. Then I remember. I can't protect Beetee, too. There can only be one victor and it has to be Peeta. I must accept this. I must make decisions based on his survival only. "All right," I say. "We'll stay until the Careers are dead. But that's the end of it." I turn and wave to Finnick. "Hey, Finnick, come on in! We figured out how to make you pretty again!" The three of us scour all

the scabs from our bodies, helping with the others' backs, and come out the same pink as the sky. We apply another round of medicine because the skin seems too delicate for the sunlight, but it doesn't look half as bad on smooth skin and will be good camouflage in the jungle.

Beetee calls us over, and it turns out that during all those hours of fiddling with wire, he has indeed come up with a plan. "I think we'll all agree our next job is to kill Brutus and Enobaria," he says mildly. "I doubt they'll attack us openly again, now that they're so outnumbered. We could track them down, I suppose, but it's dangerous, exhausting work." "Do you think they've figured out about the clock?" I ask. "If they haven't, they'll figure it out soon enough. Perhaps not as specifically as we have. But they must know that at least some of the zones are wired for attacks and that they're
reoccurring in a circular fashion. Also, the fact that our last fight was cut off by Gamemaker intervention will not have gone unnoticed by them. We know it was an attempt to disorient us, but they must be asking themselves why it was done, and this, too, may lead them to the realization that the arena's a clock," says Beetee. "So I think our best bet will be setting our own trap." "Wait, let me get Johanna up," says Finnick. "She'll be rabid if she thinks she missed something this important." "Or not," I mutter, since she's always pretty much rabid, but I don't stop him, because I'd be angry myself if I was excluded from a plan at this point. When she's joined us, Beetee shoos us all back a bit so he can have room to work in the sand. He swiftly draws a circle and divides it into twelve wedges. It's the arena, not rendered in-Peeta's precise strokes but in the rough lines of a man whose mind is occupied by other, far more complex things. "If you were

Brutus and Enobaria, knowing what you do now about the jungle, where would you feel safest?" Beetee asks. There's nothing patronizing in his voice, and yet I can't help thinking he reminds me of a schoolteacher about to ease children into a lesson. Perhaps it's the age difference, or simply that Beetee is probably about a million times smarter than the rest of us. "Where we are now. On the beach," says Peeta. "It's the safest place." "So why aren't they on the beach?" says Beetee. "Because we're here," says Johanna impatiently. "Exactly. We're here, claiming the beach. Now where would you go?" says Beetee. I think about the deadly jungle, the occupied beach. "I'd hide just at the edge of the jungle. So I could escape if an attack came. And so I could spy on us." "Also to eat," Finnick says. "The jungle's full of strange creatures and plants. But by watching us, I'd know the seafood's safe." Beetee smiles at us as if we've exceeded his
expectations. "Yes, good. You do see. Now here's what I propose: a twelve o'clock strike. What happens exactly at noon and at midnight?" "The lightning bolt hits the tree," I say. "Yes. So what I'm suggesting is that after the bolt hits at noon, but before it hits at midnight, we run my wire from that tree all the way down into the saltwater, which is, of course, highly conductive. When the bolt strikes, the electricity will travel

down the wire and into not only the water but also the surrounding beach, which will still be damp from the ten o'clock wave. Anyone in contact with those surfaces at that moment will be electrocuted," says Beetee. There's a long pause while we all digest Beetee's plan. It seems a bit fantastical to me, impossible even. But why? I've set thousands of snares. Isn't this just a larger snare with a more

scientific component? Could it work? How can we even question it, we tributes trained to gather fish and lumber and coal? What do we know about harnessing power from the sky? Peeta takes a stab at it. "Will that wire really be able to conduct that much power, Beetee? It looks so fragile, like it would just burn up." "Oh, it will. But not until the current has passed through it. It will act something like a fuse, in fact. Except the electricity will travel along it," says Beetee. "How do you know?" asks Johanna, clearly not convinced. "Because I invented it," says Beetee, as if slightly surprised. "It's not actually wire in the usual sense. Nor is the lightning natural lightning nor the tree a real tree. You

know trees better than any of us, Johanna. It would be destroyed by now, wouldn't it?" "Yes," she says glumly. "Don't worry about the wire -- it will do just what I say," Beetee
assures us. "And where will we be when this happens?" asks Finnick. "Far enough up in the jungle to be safe," Beetee replies. "The Careers will be safe, too, then, unless they're in the vicinity of the water," I point out. "That's right," says Beetee. "But all the seafood will be cooked," says Peeta. "Probably more than cooked," says Beetee. "We will most likely be eliminating that as a food source for good. But you found other edible things in the jungle, right, Katniss?" "Yes. Nuts and rats," I say. "And we have sponsors." "Well, then. I don't see that as a problem," says Beetee. "But as we are allies and this will require all our efforts, the decision of whether or not to attempt it is up to you four." We are like schoolchildren. Completely unable to dispute his theory with anything but the most elementary concerns. Most of which don't even have anything to do with his actual plan. I look at the others' disconcerted faces. "Why not?" I say. "If it

fails, there's no harm done. If it works, there's a decent chance we'll kill them. And even if we don't and just kill the seafood, Brutus and Enobaria lose it as a food source, too." "I say we try it," says Peeta. "Katniss is right." Finnick looks at Johanna and raises his eyebrows. He will not go forward without her. "All right," she says finally. "It's better than hunting them down in the jungle, anyway. And I doubt they'll figure out our plan, since we can barely understand it ourselves." Beetee wants to inspect the lightning tree before he has to rig it. Judging by the sun, it's about nine in the morning. We have to leave our beach soon, anyway. So we break camp, walk over to the beach that borders the lightning section, and head into the jungle. Beetee's still too weak to hike up the slope on his own, so Finnick and Peeta take turns carrying him. I let Johanna lead because it's a pretty straight shot up to the tree, and I figure she can't get
us too lost. Besides, I can do a lot more damage with a sheath of arrows than she can with two axes, so I'm the best one to bring up the rear. The dense, muggy air weighs on me. There's been no break from it since the Games began. I wish Haymitch would stop sending us that District 3 bread and get us some more of that District 4 stuff, because I've sweated out buckets in the last two days, and even though I've had the fish, I'm craving salt. A piece of ice would be another good idea. Or a cold drink of water. I'm grateful for the fluid from the trees, but it's the same temperature as the seawater and the air and the other tributes and me. We're all just one big, warm stew. As we near the tree, Finnick suggests I take the lead. "Katniss can hear the force field," he explains to Beetee and Johanna. "Hear it?" asks Beetee. "Only with

the ear the Capitol reconstructed," I say. Guess who

I'm not fooling with that story? Beetee. Because surely he remembers that he showed me how to spot a force field, and probably it's impossible to hear force fields, anyway. But, for whatever reason, he doesn't question my claim. "Then by all means, let Katniss go first," he says, pausing a moment to wipe the steam off his glasses. "Force fields are nothing to play around with." The lightning tree's unmistakable as it towers so high above the others. I find a bunch of nuts and make everybody wait while I move slowly up the slope, tossing the nuts ahead of me. But I see the force field almost immediately, even before a nut hits it, because it's only about fifteen yards away. My eyes, which are sweeping the greenery before me, catch sight of the rippled square high up and to my right. I throw a nut directly in front of me and hear it sizzle in confirmation. "Just stay below the lightning tree," I tell the others. We divide up
duties. Finnick guards Beetee while he examines the tree, Johanna taps for water, Peeta gathers nuts, and I hunt nearby. The tree rats don't seem to have any fear of humans, so I take down three easily. The sound of the ten o'clock wave reminds me I should get back, and I return to the others and clean my kill. Then I draw a line in the dirt a few feet from the force field as a reminder to keep back, and Peeta and I settle down to roast nuts and sear cubes of rat. Beetee is still messing around the tree, doing I don't know what, taking measurements and such. At one point he snaps off a sliver of bark, joins us, and throws it against the force field. It bounces back and lands on the ground, glowing. In a few moments it returns to its original color. "Well, that explains a lot," says Beetee. I look at Peeta and can't help biting my lip to keep from laughing since it explains absolutely nothing to anyone but Beetee. About this time we

hear the sound of clicks rising from the sector adjacent to us. That means it's eleven o'clock. It's far louder in the jungle than it was on the beach last night. We all listen intently. "It's not mechanical," Beetee says decidedly. "I'd guess insects," I say. "Maybe beetles." "Something with pincers," adds Finnick. The sound swells, as if alerted by our quiet words to the proximity of live flesh. Whatever is making that clicking, I bet it could strip us to the bone in seconds. "We should get out of here, anyway," says Johanna. "There's less than an hour before the lightning starts." We don't go that far, though. Only to the identical tree in the blood-rain section. We have a picnic of sorts, squatting on the ground, eating our jungle food, waiting for the bolt that signals noon. At Beetee's request, I climb up into the canopy as the clicking begins to fade out. When the lightning strikes, it's dazzling, even from here, even in this bright sunlight. It
completely encompasses the distant tree, making it glow a

hot blue-white and causing the surrounding air to crackle with electricity. I swing down and report my findings to Beetee, who seems satisfied, even if I'm not terribly scientific. We take a circuitous route back to the ten o'clock beach. The sand is smooth and damp, swept clean by the recent wave. Beetee essentially gives us the afternoon off while he works with the wire. Since it's his weapon and the rest of us have to defer to his knowledge so entirely, there's the odd feeling of being let out of school early. At first we take turns having naps in the shadowy edge of the jungle, but by late afternoon everyone is awake and restless. We decide, since this might be our last chance for seafood, to make a sort of feast of it. Under Finnick's guidance we spear fish and gather shellfish, even dive for oysters. I like this last part

best, not because I have any great appetite for oysters. I only ever tasted them once, in the Capitol, and I couldn't get around the sliminess. But it's lovely, deep down under the water, like being in a different world. The water's very clear, and schools of bright-hued fish and strange sea flowers decorate the sand floor. Johanna keeps watch while Finnick, Peeta, and I clean and lay out the seafood. Peeta's just pried open an oyster when I hear him give a laugh. "Hey, look at this!" He holds up a glistening, perfect pearl about the size of a pea. "You know, if you put enough pressure on coal it turns to pearls," he says earnestly to Finnick. "No, it doesn't," says Finnick dismissively. But I crack up, remembering that's how a clueless Effie Trinket presented us to the people of the Capitol last year, before anyone knew us. As coal pressured into pearls by our weighty existence. Beauty that arose out of pain. Peeta rinses the pearl off in the water and hands it to
me. "For you." I hold it out on my palm and examine its iridescent surface in the sunlight. Yes, I will keep it. For the few remaining hours of my life I will keep it close. This last gift from Peeta. The only one I can really accept. Perhaps it will give me strength in the final moments. "Thanks," I say, closing my fist around it. I look coolly into the blue eyes of the person who is now my greatest opponent, the person who would keep me alive at his own expense. And I promise myself I will defeat his plan. The laughter drains from those eyes, and they are staring so intensely into mine, it's like they can read my thoughts. "The locket didn't work, did it?" Peeta says, even though Finnick is right there. Even though everyone can hear him. "Katniss?" "It worked," I say. "But not the way I wanted it to," he says, averting his glance. After that he will look at nothing but oysters. Just as we're about to eat, a parachute appears bearing two supplements to our

meal. A small pot of spicy red sauce and yet another round of rolls from District 3. Finnick, of course, immediately counts them. "Twenty-four again," he says. Thirty-two rolls,

then. So we each take five, leaving seven, which will never divide equally. It's bread for only one. The salty fish flesh, the succulent shellfish. Even the oysters seem tasty, vastly improved by the sauce. We gorge ourselves until no one can hold another bite, and even then there are leftovers. They won't keep, though, so we toss all the remaining food back into the water so the Careers won't get it when we leave. No one bothers about the shells. The wave should clear those away. There's nothing to do now but wait. Peeta and I sit at the edge of the water, hand in hand, wordless. He gave his speech last night but it didn't change my mind, and nothing I can say will change his. The time for persuasive
gifts is over. I have the pearl, though, secured in a parachute with the spile and the medicine at my waist. I hope it makes it back to District 12. Surely my mother and Prim will know to return it to Peeta before they bury my body. The anthem begins, but there are no faces in the sky tonight. The audience will be restless, thirsting for blood. Beetee's trap holds enough promise, though, that the Gamemakers haven't sent in other attacks. Perhaps they are simply curious to see if it will work. At what Finnick and I judge to be about nine, we leave our shell-strewn camp, cross to the twelve o'clock beach, and begin to quietly hike up to the lightning tree in the light of the moon. Our full stomachs make us more uncomfortable and breathless than we were on the morning's climb. I begin to regret those last dozen oysters. Beetee asks Finnick to assist him, and the rest of us stand guard. Before he even attaches any wire to the

tree, Beetee unrolls yards and yards of the stuff. He has Finnick secure it tightly around a broken branch and lay it on the ground. Then they stand on either side of the tree, passing the spool back and forth as they wrap the wire around and around the trunk. At first it seems arbitrary, then I see a pattern, like an intricate maze, appearing in the moonlight on Beetee's side. I wonder if it makes any difference how the wire's placed, or if this is merely to add to the speculation of the audience. I bet most of them know as much about electricity as I do. The work on the trunk's completed just as we hear the wave begin. I've never really worked out at what point in the ten o'clock hour it erupts. There must be some buildup, then the wave itself, then the aftermath of the flooding. But the sky tells me ten-thirty. This is when Beetee reveals the rest of the plan. Since we move most swiftly through the trees, he wants Johanna and
me to take the coil down through the jungle, unwinding the wire as we go. We are to lay it across the twelve o'clock beach and drop the metal spool, with whatever is left, deep into the water, making sure it sinks. Then run for the jungle. If we go now, right now, we should make it to safety. "I want to go with them as a guard," Peeta says immediately. After the moment with the

pearl, I know he's less willing than ever to let me out of his sight. "You're too slow. Besides, I'll need you on this end. Katniss will guard," says Beetee. "There's no time to debate this. I'm sorry. If the girls are to get out of there alive, they need to move now." He hands the coil to Johanna. I don't like the plan any more than Peeta does. How can I protect him at a distance? But Beetee's right. With his leg, Peeta is too slow to make it down the slope in time. Johanna and I are the

fastest and most sure-footed on the jungle floor. I can't think of any alternative. And if I trust anyone here besides Peeta, it's Beetee. "It's okay," I tell Peeta. "We'll just drop the coil and come straight back up." "Not into the lightning zone," Beetee reminds me. "Head for the tree in the one-to-two-o'clock sector. If you find you're running out of time, move over one more. Don't even think about going back on the beach, though, until I can assess the damage."

I take Peeta's face in my hands. "Don't worry. I'll see you at midnight." I give him a kiss and, before he can object any further, I let go and turn to Johanna. "Ready?" "Why not?" says Johanna with a shrug. She's clearly no happier about being teamed up than I am. But we're all caught up in Beetee's trap. "You guard, I'll unwind. We can trade off later." Without further discussion, we head down the slope. In fact
there's very little discussion between us at all. We move at a pretty good clip, one manning the coil, the other keeping watch. About halfway down, we hear the clicking beginning to rise, indicating it's after eleven. "Better hurry," Johanna says. "I want to put a lot of distance between me and that water before the lightning hits. Just in case Volts miscalculated something." "I'll take the coil for a while," I say. It's harder work laying out the wire than guarding, and she's had a long turn. "Here," Johanna says, passing me the coil. Both of our hands are still on the metal cylinder when there's a slight vibration. Suddenly the thin golden wire from above springs down at us, bunching in tangled loops and curls around our wrists. Then the severed end snakes up to our feet. It only takes a second to register this rapid turn of events. Johanna and I look at each other, but neither of us has to say it. Someone not far above us has cut the wire. And

they will be on us at any moment. My hand frees itself from the wire and has just closed on the feathers of an arrow when the metal cylinder smashes into the side of my head. The next thing I know, I'm lying on my back in the vines, a terrible pain in my left temple. Something's wrong with my eyes. My vision blurs in and out of focus as I strain to make the two moons floating up in the sky into one. It's hard to breathe, and I realize Johanna's sitting on my chest, pinning me at the shoulders with her knees. There's a stab in my left forearm. I try to jerk away but I'm still too incapacitated. Johanna's digging something, I guess the point of her knife, into my flesh, twisting it around. There's an excruciating ripping sensation and warmth runs down my wrist, filling my palm. She swipes down my arm and coats half my face with my blood. "Stay down!" she hisses. Her weight leaves my body and I'm alone. Stay down? I think. What? What is
happening? My eyes shut, blocking out the inconsistent world, as I try to make sense of my situation. All I can think of is Johanna shoving Wiress to the beach. "Just stay down, will you?" But she didn't attack Wiress. Not like this. I'm not Wiress, anyway. I'm not Nuts. "Just stay down, will you?" echoes around inside my brain. Footsteps coming. Two pairs. Heavy, not trying to conceal their whereabouts. Brutus's voice. "She's good as dead! Come on, Enobaria!" Feet moving into the night. Am I? I drift in and out of consciousness looking for an answer. Am I as good as dead? I'm in no position to make an argument to the

contrary. In fact, rational thinking is a struggle. This much I know. Johanna attacked me. Smashed that cylinder into my head. Cut my arm, probably doing irreparable damage to veins and arteries, and then Brutus and Enobaria

showed up before she had time to finish me off. The alliance is over. Finnick and Johanna must have had an agreement to turn on us tonight. I knew we should have left this morning. I don't know where Beetee stands. But I'm fair game, and so is Peeta. Peeta! My eyes fly open in panic. Peeta is waiting up by the tree, unsuspecting and off guard. Maybe Finnick has even killed him already. "No," I whisper. That wire was cut from a short distance away by the Careers. Finnick and Beetee and Peeta--they can't know what's going on down here. They can only be wondering what has happened, why the wire has gone slack or maybe even sprung back to the tree. This, in itself, can't be a signal to kill, can it? Surely this was just Johanna deciding the time had come to break with us. Kill me. Escape from the Careers. Then bring Finnick into the fight as soon as possible. I don't know. I don't know. I only know that I must get back to Peeta
and keep him alive. It takes every ounce of will I have to push up into a sitting position and drag myself up the side of a tree to my feet. It's lucky I have something to hold on to because the jungle's tilting back and forth. Without any warning, I lean forward and vomit up the seafood feast, heaving until there can't possibly be an oyster left in my body. Trembling and slick with sweat, I assess my physical condition. As I lift up my damaged arm, blood sprays me in the face and the world makes another alarming shift. I squeeze my eyes shut and cling to the tree until things steady a little. Then I take a few careful steps to a neighboring tree, pull off some moss, and without examining the wound further, tightly bandage my arm. Better. Definitely better not to see it. Then I allow my hand to tentatively touch my head wound. There's a huge lump but not too much blood. Obviously I've got some internal

damage, but I don't seem in danger of bleeding to death. At least not through my head. I dry my hands on moss and get a shaky grip on my bow with my damaged left arm. Secure the notch of an arrow to the string. Make my feet move up the slope. Peeta. My dying wish. My promise. To keep him alive. My heart lifts a bit when I realize he must be alive because no cannon has fired. Maybe Johanna was acting alone, knowing Finnick would side with her once her intentions were clear. Although it's hard to guess what goes on between those two. I think of how he looked to her for confirmation before he'd agree to help set Beetee's trap. There's a much deeper alliance based on years of friendship and who knows what else. Therefore, if Johanna has turned on me, I should no longer trust Finnick. I reach this conclusion only seconds before I hear someone running down the slope toward me. Neither Peetanor Beetee could move at this pace. I duck behind a curtain of vines, concealing myself just in time. Finnick flies by me, his skin shadowy with medicine, leaping through the undergrowth like a deer. He soon reaches the sight of my attack, must see the blood. "Johanna! Katniss!" he calls. I stay put until he goes in the direction Johanna and the Careers took. I move as quickly as I can without sending the world into a whirl. My head throbs with the rapid beat of my heart. The insects, possibly excited by the smell of blood, have increased their clicking until it's a continuous roar in my ears. No, wait. Maybe my ears are actually ringing from the hit. Until the insects shut up, it will be impossible to tell. But when the insects go silent, the lightning will start. I have to move faster. I have to get to Peeta. The boom of a cannon pulls me up short. Someone has died. I know that with everyone running around armed and scared right now, it

could be anybody. But whoever it is, I believe the death will trigger a kind of free-for-all out here in the night. People will kill first and wonder about their motives later. I force my legs into a run. Something snags my feet and I sprawl out on the ground. I feel it wrapping around me, entwining me in sharp fibers. A net! This must be one of Finnick's fancy nets, positioned to trap me, and he must be nearby, trident in hand. I flail around for a moment, only working the web more tightly around me, and then I catch a glimpse of it in the moonlight. Confused, I lift my arm and see it's entangled in shimmering golden threads. It's not one of Finnick's nets at all, but Beetee's wire. I carefully rise to my feet and find I'm in a patch of the stuff that caught on a trunk on its way back to the lightning tree. Slowly I disengage myself from the wire, step out of its reach, and continue uphill. On the good side, I'm on the right path and
have not been so disoriented by the head injury as to lose my sense of direction. On the bad side, the wire has reminded me of the oncoming lightning storm. I can still hear the insects, but are they starting to fade? I keep the loops of wire a few feet to my left as a guide as I run but take great care not to touch them. If those insects are fading and the first bolt is about to strike the tree, then all its power will come surging down that wire and anyone in contact with it will die. The tree swims into view, its trunk festooned with gold. I slow down, try to move with some stealth, but I'm really just lucky to be upright. I look for a sign of the others. No one. No one is there. "Peeta?" I call softly. "Peeta?" A soft moan answers me and I whip around to find a figure lying higher up on the ground. "Beetee!" I exclaim. I hurry and kneel beside him. The moan must have been involuntary. He's not conscious, although I can see no wound except a

gash below the crook of his elbow. I grab a nearby handful of moss and clumsily wrap it while I try to rouse him.

"Beetee! Beetee, what's going on! Who cut you? Beetee!" I shake him in the way you should never shake an injured person, but I don't know what else to do. He moans again and briefly raises a hand to ward me off. This is when I notice he's holding a knife, one Peeta was carrying earlier, I think, which is wrapped loosely in wire. Perplexed, I stand and lift the wire, confirming it's attached back at the tree. It takes me a moment to remember the second, much shorter strand that Beetee wound around a branch and left on the ground before he even began his design on the tree. I'd thought it had some electrical significance, had been set aside to be used later. But it never was, because there's probably a good twenty, twenty-five yards here. I squint hard up the hill and realize
we're only a few paces from the force field. There's the telltale square, high up and to my right, just as it was this morning. What did Beetee do? Did he actually try to drive the knife into the force field the way Peeta did by accident? And what's the deal with the wire? Was this his backup plan? If electrifying the water failed, did he mean to send the lightning bolt's energy into the force field? What would that do, anyway? Nothing? A great deal? Fry us all? The force field must mostly be energy, too, I guess. The one in the Training Center was invisible. This one seems to somehow mirror the jungle. But I've seen it falter when Peeta's knife struck it and when my arrows hit. The real world lies right behind it. My ears are not ringing. It was the insects after all. I know that now because they are dying out quickly and I hear nothing but the jungle sounds. Beetee is useless. I can't rouse him. I can't save him. I don't know what he was trying

to do with the knife and the wire and he's incapable of explaining. The moss bandage on my arm is soaked and there's no use fooling myself. I'm so light-headed I'll black out in a matter of minutes. I've got to get away from this tree and-- "Katniss!" I hear his voice though he's a far distance away. But what is he doing? Peeta must have figured out that everyone is hunting us by now. "Katniss!" I can't protect him. I can't move fast or far and my shooting abilities are questionable at best. I do the one thing I can to draw the attackers away from him and over to me. "Peeta!" I scream out. "Peeta! I'm here! Peeta!" Yes, I will draw them in, any in my vicinity, away from Peeta and over to me and the lightning tree that will soon be a weapon in and of itself. "I'm here! I'm here!" He won't make it. Not with that leg in the night. He will never make it in time. "Peeta!" It's working. I can hear them coming. Two of them. Crashing through the
jungle. My knees start to give out and I sink down next to Beetee, resting my weight on my heels. My bow and arrow lift into position. If I can take them out, will Peeta survive the rest? Enobaria and Finnick reach the lightning tree. They can't see me, sitting above them on

the slope, my skin camouflaged in ointment. I home in on Enobaria's neck. With any luck, when I kill her, Finnick will duck behind the tree for cover just as the lightning bolt strikes. And it will be any second. There's only a faint insect click here and there. I can kill them now. I can kill them both. Another cannon. "Katniss!" Peeta's voice howls for me. But this time I don't answer. Beetee still breathes faintly beside me. He and I will soon die. Finnick and Enobaria will die. Peeta is alive. Two cannons have sounded. Brutus, Johanna, Chaff. Two of them are already dead. That will

leave Peeta with only one tribute to kill. And that is the very best I can do. One enemy. Enemy. Enemy. The word is tugging at a recent memory. Pulling it into the present. The look on Haymitch's face. "Katniss, when you're in the arena ..." The scowl, the misgiving. "What?" I hear my own voice tighten as I bristle at some unspoken accusation. "You just remember who the enemy is," Haymitch says. "That's all." Haymitch's last words of advice to me. Why would I need reminding? I have always known who the enemy is. Who starves and tortures and kills us in the arena. Who will soon kill everyone I love. My bow drops as his meaning registers. Yes, I know who the enemy is. And it's not Enobaria. I finally see Beetee's knife with clear eyes. My shaking hands slide the wire from the hilt, wind it around the arrow just above the feathers, and secure it with a knot picked up in training. I rise, turning to the force field, fully revealing myself but no longer caring. Only caring about where I should direct my tip, where Beetee would have driven the knife if he'd been able to choose. My bow tilts up at the wavering square, the flaw, the ... what did he call it that day? The chink in the armor. I let the arrow fly, see it hit its mark and vanish, pulling the thread of gold behind it. My hair stands on end and the lightning strikes the tree. A flash of white runs up the wire, and for just a moment, the dome bursts into a dazzling blue light. I'm thrown backward to the ground, body useless, paralyzed, eyes frozen wide, as feathery bits of matter rain down on me. I can't reach Peeta. I can't even reach my pearl. My eyes strain to capture one last image of beauty to take with me. Right before the explosions begin, I find a star. Everything seems to erupt at once. The earth explodes into showers of dirt and plant

matter. Trees burst into flames. Even the sky fills with brightly colored blossoms of light. I can't think why the sky's being bombed until I realize the Gamemakers are shooting off fireworks up there, while the real destruction occurs on the ground. Just in case it's not enough fun watching the obliteration of the arena and the remaining tributes. Or perhaps to illuminate our gory ends. Will they let anyone survive? Will there be a victor of the Seventy-fifth Hunger Games? Maybe not. After all, what is this Quarter Quell but ... what was it President Snow read from the card? "... a reminder to the rebels that even the strongest among them cannot overcome the power of the Capitol..." Not even the strongest of the strong will triumph. Perhaps they never intended to have a victor in these Games at all. Or perhaps my final act of rebellion forced their hand. I'm sorry, Peeta, I think. I'm sorry I couldn't save you. Save him? More likely I
stole his last chance at life, condemned him, by destroying the force field. Maybe, if we had all played by the rules, they might have let him live. The hovercraft materializes above me without warning. If it was quiet, and a mockingjay perched close at hand, I would have heard the jungle go silent and then the bird's call that precedes the appearance of the Capitol's aircraft. But my ears could never make out anything so delicate in this bombardment. The claw drops from the underside until it's directly overhead. The metal talons slide under me. I want to scream, run, smash my way out of it but I'm frozen, helpless to do anything but fervently hope I'll die before I reach the shadowy figures awaiting me above. They have not spared my life to crown me victor but to make my death as slow and public as possible. My worst fears are confirmed when the face that greets me inside the hovercraft belongs to Plutarch

Heavensbee, Head Gamemaker. What a mess I have made of his beautiful Games with the clever ticking clock and the field of victors. He will suffer for

his failure, probably lose his life, but not before he sees me punished. His hand reaches for me, I think to strike me, but he does something worse. With his thumb and his forefinger, he slides my eyelids shut, sentencing me to the vulnerability of darkness. They can do anything to me now and I will not even see it coming. My heart pounds so hard the blood begins to stream from beneath my soaked moss bandage. My thoughts grow foggy. Possibly I can bleed to death before they can revive me after all. In my mind, I whisper a thank-you to Johanna Mason for the excellent wound she inflicted as I black out. When I swim back into semi consciousness, I can feel I'm lying on a padded table.
There's the pinching sensation of tubes in my left arm. They are trying to keep me alive because, if I slide quietly, privately into death, it will be a victory. I'm still largely unable to move, open my eyelids, raise my head. But my right arm has regained a little motion. It flops across my body, feeling like a flipper, no, something less animated, like a club. I have no real motor coordination, no proof that I even still have fingers. Yet I manage to swing my arm around until I rip the tubes out. A beeping goes off but I can't stay awake to find out who it will summon. The next time I surface, my hands are tied down to the table, the tubes back in my arm. I can open my eyes and lift my head slightly, though. I'm in a large room with low ceilings and a silvery light. There are two rows of beds facing each other. I can hear the breathing of what I assume are my fellow victors. Directly across from me I see Beetee with about ten different

machines hooked up to him. Just let us die! I scream in my mind. I slam my head back hard on the table and go out again. When I finally, truly, wake up, the restraints are gone. I raise my hand and find I have fingers that can move at my command again. I push myself to a sitting position and hold on to the padded table until the room settles into focus. My left arm is bandaged but the tubes dangle off stands by the bed. I'm alone except for Beetee, who still lies in front of me, being sustained by his army of machines. Where are the others, then? Peeta, Finnick, Enobaria, and...and...one more, right? Either Johanna or Chaff or Brutus was still alive when the bombs began. I'm sure they'll want to make an example of us all. But where have they taken them? Moved them from hospital to prison? "Peeta..." I whisper. I so wanted to protect him. Am still resolved to. Since I have failed to keep him safe in life, I must find him, kill him now before the
Capitol gets to choose the agonizing means of his death. I slide my legs off the table and look around for a weapon. There are a few syringes sealed in sterile plastic on a table near Beetee's bed. Perfect. All I'll need is air and a clear shot at one of his veins. I pause for a moment, consider killing Beetee. But if I do, the monitors will start beeping and I'll be

caught before I get to Peeta. I make a silent promise to return and finish him off if I can. I'm naked except for a thin nightgown, so I slip the syringe under the bandage that covers the wound on my arm. There are no guards at the door. No doubt I'm miles beneath the Training Center or in some Capitol stronghold, and the possibility of my escape is nonexistent. It doesn't matter. I'm not escaping, just finishing a job. I creep down a narrow hallway to a metal door that stands slightly ajar. Someone is behind it. I take

out the syringe and grip it in my hand. Flattening myself against the wall, I listen to the voices inside. "Communications are down in Seven, Ten, and Twelve. But Eleven has control of transportation now, so there's at least a hope of them getting some food out." Plutarch Heavensbee. I think. Although I've only really spoken with him once. A hoarse voice asks a question. "No, I'm sorry. There's no way I can get you to Four. But I've given special orders for her retrieval if possible. It's the best I can do, Finnick." Finnick. My mind struggles to make sense of the conversation, of the fact that it's taking place between Plutarch Heavensbee and Finnick. Is he so near and dear to the Capitol that he'll be excused his crimes? Or did he really have no idea what Beetee intended? He croaks out something else. Something heavy with despair. "Don't be stupid. That's the worst thing you could do. Get her killed for sure. As long as you're alive,
they'll keep her alive for bait," says Haymitch. Says Haymitch! I bang through the door and stumble into the room. Haymitch, Plutarch, and a very beat-up Finnick sit around a table laid with a meal no one is eating. Daylight streams in the curved windows, and in the distance I see the top of a forest of trees. We are flying. "Done knocking yourself out, sweetheart?" says Haymitch, the annoyance clear in his voice. But as I careen forward he steps up and catches my wrists, steadying me. He looks at my hand. "So it's you and a syringe against the Capitol? See, this is why no one lets you make the plans." I stare at him uncomprehendingly. "Drop it." I feel the pressure increase on my right wrist until my hand is forced to open and I release the syringe. He settles me in a chair next to Finnick. Plutarch puts a bowl of broth in front of me. A roll. Slips a spoon into my hand. "Eat," he says in a much kinder voice

than Haymitch used. Haymitch sits directly in front of me. "Katniss, I'm going to explain what happened. I don't want you to ask any questions until I'm through. Do you understand?" I nod numbly. And this is what he tells me. There was a plan to break us out of the arena from the moment the Quell was announced. The victor tributes from 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 11 had varying degrees of knowledge about it. Plutarch Heavensbee has been, for several years, part of an undercover group aiming to overthrow the Capitol. He made sure the wire was among the weapons.

Beetee was in charge of blowing a hole in the force field. The bread we received in the arena was code for the time of the rescue. The district where the bread originated indicated the day. Three. The number of rolls the hour. Twenty-four. The hovercraft belongs to District 13. Bonnie
and Twill, the women I met in the woods from 8, were right about its existence and its defense capabilities. We are currently on a very roundabout journey to District 13. Meanwhile, most of the districts in Panem are in full-scale rebellion. Haymitch stops to see if I am following. Or maybe he is done for the moment. It's an awful lot to take in, this elaborate plan in which I was a piece, just as I was meant to be a piece in the Hunger Games. Used without consent, without knowledge. At least in the Hunger Games, I knew I was being played with. My supposed friends have been a lot more secretive. "You didn't tell me." My voice is as ragged as Finnick's. "Neither you nor Peeta were told. We couldn't risk it," says Plutarch. "I was even worried you might mention my indiscretion with the watch during the Games." He pulls out his pocket watch and runs his thumb across the crystal, lighting up the mockingjay. "Of course, when I showed you

this, I was merely tipping you off about the arena. As a mentor. I thought it might be a first step toward gaining your trust. I never dreamed you'd be a tribute again." "I still don't understand why Peeta and I weren't let in on the plan," I say. "Because once the force field blew, you'd be the first ones they'd try to capture, and the less you knew, the better," says Haymitch. "The first ones? Why?" I say, trying to hang on to the train of thought. "For the same reason the rest of us agreed to die to keep you alive," says Finnick. "No, Johanna tried to kill me," I say. "Johanna knocked you out to cut the tracker from your arm and lead Brutus and Enobaria away from you," says Haymitch. "What?" My head aches so and I want them to stop talking in circles. "I don't know what you're--" "We had to save you because you're the mockingjay, Katniss," says Plutarch. "While you live, the revolution lives." The bird, the pin, the song, the berries, the
watch, the cracker, the dress that burst into flames. I am the mockingjay. The one that survived despite the Capitol's plans. The symbol of the rebellion. It's what I suspected in the woods when I found Bonnie and Twill escaping. Though I never really understood the magnitude. But then, I wasn't meant to understand. I think of Haymitch's sneering at my plans to flee District 12, start my own uprising, even the very notion that District 13 could exist. Subterfuges and deceptions. And if he could do that, behind his mask of sarcasm and drunkenness, so convincingly and for so long, what else has he lied about? I know what else. "Peeta," I whisper, my heart sinking. "The others kept Peeta alive because if he died, we knew there'd be no keeping you in

an alliance," says Haymitch. "And we couldn't risk leaving you unprotected." His words are matter-of-fact, his

expression unchanged, but he can't hide the tinge of gray that colors his face. "Where is Peeta?" I hiss at him. "He was picked up by the Capitol along with Johanna and Enobaria," says Haymitch. And finally he has the decency to drop his gaze. Technically, I am unarmed. But no one should ever underestimate the harm that fingernails can do, especially if the target is unprepared. I lunge across the table and rake mine down Haymitch's face, causing blood to flow and damage to one eye. Then we are both screaming terrible, terrible things at each other, and Finnick is trying to drag me out, and I know it's all Haymitch can do not to rip me apart, but I'm the mockingjay. I'm the mockingjay and it's too hard keeping me alive as it is. Other hands help Finnick and I'm back on my table, my body restrained, my wrists tied down, so I slam my head in fury again and again against the table. A needle pokes my arm and my head hurts so badly I stop
fighting and simply wail in a horrible, dying-animal way, until my voice gives out. The drug causes sedation, not sleep, so I am trapped in fuzzy, dully aching misery for what seems like always. They reinsert their tubes and talk to me in soothing

voices that never reach me. All I can think of is Peeta, lying on a similar table somewhere, while they try to break him for information he doesn't even have. "Katniss. Katniss, I'm sorry." Finnick's voice comes from the bed next to me and slips into my consciousness. Perhaps because we're in the same kind of pain. "I wanted to go back for him and Johanna, but I couldn't move." I don't answer. Finnick Odair's good intentions mean less than nothing. "It's better for him than Johanna. They'll figure out he doesn't know anything pretty fast. And they won't kill him if they think

they can use him against you," says Finnick. "Like bait?" I say to the ceiling. "Like how they'll use Annie for bait, Finnick?" I can hear him weeping but I don't care. They probably won't even bother to question her, she's so far gone. Gone right off the deep end years ago in her Games. There's a good chance I'm headed in the same direction. Maybe I'm already going crazy and no one has the heart to tell me. I feel crazy enough. "I wish she was dead," he says. "I wish they were all dead and we were, too. It would be best." Well, there's no good response to that. I can hardly dispute it since I was walking around with a syringe to kill Peeta when I found them. Do I really want him dead? What I want ... what I want is to have him back. But I'll never get him back now. Even if the rebel forces could somehow overthrow the Capitol, you can be sure President Snow's last act would be to cut Peeta's throat. No. I will never get him back. So then
dead is best. But will Peeta know that or will he keep fighting? He's so strong and such a good liar. Does he think he has a chance of surviving? Does he even care if he does? He wasn't planning on it, anyway. He had already signed off on life. Maybe, if he knows I was rescued, he's even happy. Feels he fulfilled his mission to keep me alive. I think I hate him even more than I do Haymitch. I give up. Stop speaking, responding, refuse food and water. They can pump whatever they want into my arm, but it takes more than that to keep a person going once she's lost the will to live. I even have a funny notion that if I do die, maybe Peeta will be allowed to live. Not as a free person but as an Avox or something, waiting on the future tributes of District 12. Then maybe he could find some way to escape. My death could, in fact, still save him. If it can't, no matter. It's enough to die of spite. To punish Haymitch, who, of all the people in this rotting world,

has turned Peeta and me into pieces in his Games. I trusted him. I put what was precious in Haymitch's hands. And he has betrayed me. "See, this is why no one lets you make the plans," he said. That's true. No one in their right mind would let me make the plans. Because I obviously can't tell a friend from an enemy. A lot of people come by to talk to me, but I make all their words sound like the clicking of the insects in the jungle. Meaningless and

distant. Dangerous, but only if approached. Whenever the words start to become distinct, I moan until they give me more painkiller and that fixes things right up. Until one time, I open my eyes and find someone I cannot block out looking down at me. Someone who will not plead, or explain, or think he can alter my design with entreaties, because he alone really knows how I operate. "Gale," I whisper. "Hey,
Catnip." He reaches down and pushes a strand of hair out of my eyes. One side of his face has been burned fairly recently. His arm is in a sling, and I can see bandages under his miner's shirt. What has happened to him? How is he even here? Something very bad has happened back home. It is not so much a question of forgetting Peeta as remembering the others. All it takes is one look at Gale and they come surging into the present, demanding to be acknowledged. "Prim?" I gasp. "She's alive. So is your mother. I got them out in time," he says. "They're not in District Twelve?" I ask. "After the Games, they sent in planes. Dropped firebombs." He hesitates. "Well, you know what happened to the Hob." I do know. I saw it go up. That old warehouse embedded with coal dust. The whole district's covered with the stuff. A new kind of horror begins to rise up inside me as I imagine firebombs hitting the Seam. "They're not in District Twelve?"

I repeat. As if saying it will somehow fend off the truth. "Katniss," Gale says softly. I recognize that voice. It's the same one he uses to approach wounded animals before he delivers a deathblow. I instinctively raise my hand to block his words but he catches it and holds on tightly. "Don't," I whisper. But Gale is not one to keep secrets from me. "Katniss, there is no District Twelve." END OF BOOK TWO

EOS



Prologue
Louvre Museum, Paris 10:46 P.M.
Renowned curator Jacques Saunière staggered through the vaulted archway of the museum's Grand Gallery. He lunged for the nearest painting he could see, a Caravaggio. Grabbing the gilded frame, the seventy-six-year-old man heaved the masterpiece toward himself until it tore from the wall and Saunière collapsed backward in a heap beneath the canvas.
As he had anticipated, a thundering iron gate fell nearby, barricading the entrance to the suite. The parquet floor shook. Far off, an alarm began to ring.
The curator lay a moment, gasping for breath, taking stock. I am still alive. He crawled out from under the canvas and scanned the cavernous space for someplace to hide.
A voice spoke, chillingly close. "Do not move."
On his hands and knees, the curator froze, turning his head slowly.
Only fifteen feet away, outside the sealed gate, the mountainous silhouette of his attacker stared through the iron bars. He was broad and tall, with ghost-pale skin and thinning white hair. His 

irises were pink with dark red pupils. The albino drew a pistol from his coat and aimed the barrel through the bars, directly at the curator. "You should not have run." His accent was not easy to place. "Now tell me where it is."
"I told you already," the curator stammered, kneeling defenseless on the floor of the gallery. "I have no idea what you are talking about!"
"You are lying." The man stared at him, perfectly immobile except for the glint in his ghostly eyes. "You and your brethren possess something that is not yours."
The curator felt a surge of adrenaline. How could he possibly know this?
"Tonight the rightful guardians will be restored. Tell me where it is hidden, and you will live." The man leveled his gun at the curator's head. "Is it a secret you will die for?"
Saunière could not breathe.
The man tilted his head, peering down the barrel of his gun.
Saunière held up his hands in defense. "Wait," he said slowly. "I will tell you what you need to know." The curator spoke his next words carefully. The lie he told was one he had rehearsed many times... each time praying he would never have to use it.
When the curator had finished speaking, his assailant smiled smugly. "Yes. This is exactly what the others told me."
Saunière recoiled. The others?
"I found them, too," the huge man taunted. "All three of them. They confirmed what you have just said."
It cannot be! The curator's true identity, along with the identities of his three sénéchaux, was almost as sacred as the ancient secret they protected. Saunière now realized his sénéchaux, following strict procedure, had told the same lie before their own deaths. It was part of the protocol.
The attacker aimed his gun again. "When you are gone, I will be the only one who knows the truth."
The truth. In an instant, the curator grasped the true horror of the situation. If I die, the truth will be lost forever. Instinctively, he tried to scramble for cover.
The gun roared, and the curator felt a searing heat as the bullet lodged in his stomach. He fell 

forward... struggling against the pain. Slowly, Saunière rolled over and stared back through the bars at his attacker.
The man was now taking dead aim at Saunière's head.
Saunière closed his eyes, his thoughts a swirling tempest of fear and regret.
The click of an empty chamber echoed through the corridor.
The curator's eyes flew open.
The man glanced down at his weapon, looking almost amused. He reached for a second clip, but then seemed to reconsider, smirking calmly at Saunière's gut. "My work here is done."
The curator looked down and saw the bullet hole in his white linen shirt. It was framed by a small circle of blood a few inches below his breastbone. My stomach. Almost cruelly, the bullet had missed his heart. As a veteran of la Guerre d'Algérie, the curator had witnessed this horribly drawn-out death before. For fifteen minutes, he would survive as his stomach acids seeped into his chest cavity, slowly poisoning him from within.
"Pain is good, monsieur," the man said.
Then he was gone.
Alone now, Jacques Saunière turned his gaze again to the iron gate. He was trapped, and the doors could not be reopened for at least twenty minutes. By the time anyone got to him, he would be dead. Even so, the fear that now gripped him was a fear far greater than that of his own death.
I must pass on the secret.
Staggering to his feet, he pictured his three murdered brethren. He thought of the generations who had come before them... of the mission with which they had all been entrusted.
An unbroken chain of knowledge.
Suddenly, now, despite all the precautions... despite all the fail-safes... Jacques Saunière was the only remaining link, the sole guardian of one of the most powerful secrets ever kept.
Shivering, he pulled himself to his feet.
I must find some way....
He was trapped inside the Grand Gallery, and there existed only one person on earth to whom he 

could pass the torch. Saunière gazed up at the walls of his opulent prison. A collection of the world's most famous paintings seemed to smile down on him like old friends.
Wincing in pain, he summoned all of his faculties and strength. The desperate task before him, he knew, would require every remaining second of his life. 
CHAPTER 1
Robert Langdon awoke slowly.
A telephone was ringing in the darkness—a tinny, unfamiliar ring. He fumbled for the bedside lamp and turned it on. Squinting at his surroundings he saw a plush Renaissance bedroom with Louis XVI furniture, hand-frescoed walls, and a colossal mahogany four-poster bed.
Where the hell am I?
The jacquard bathrobe hanging on his bedpost bore the monogram: HOTEL RITZ PARIS.
Slowly, the fog began to lift.
Langdon picked up the receiver. "Hello?"
"Monsieur Langdon?" a man's voice said. "I hope I have not awoken you?"
Dazed, Langdon looked at the bedside clock. It was 12:32 A.M. He had been asleep only an hour, but he felt like the dead.
"This is the concierge, monsieur. I apologize for this intrusion, but you have a visitor. He insists it is urgent."
Langdon still felt fuzzy. A visitor? His eyes focused now on a crumpled flyer on his bedside table.
THE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY OF PARIS
proudly presents
AN EVENING WITH ROBERT LANGDON
PROFESSOR OF RELIGIOUS SYMBOLOGY,
HARVARD UNIVERSITY 
Langdon groaned. Tonight's lecture—a slide show about pagan symbolism hidden in the stones of Chartres Cathedral—had probably ruffled some conservative feathers in the audience. Most likely, 

some religious scholar had trailed him home to pick a fight.
"I'm sorry," Langdon said, "but I'm very tired and—"
"Mais, monsieur," the concierge pressed, lowering his voice to an urgent whisper. "Your guest is an important man."
Langdon had little doubt. His books on religious paintings and cult symbology had made him a reluctant celebrity in the art world, and last year Langdon's visibility had increased a hundredfold after his involvement in a widely publicized incident at the Vatican. Since then, the stream of self-important historians and art buffs arriving at his door had seemed never-ending.
"If you would be so kind," Langdon said, doing his best to remain polite, "could you take the man's name and number, and tell him I'll try to call him before I leave Paris on Tuesday? Thank you." He hung up before the concierge could protest.
Sitting up now, Langdon frowned at his bedside Guest Relations Handbook, whose cover boasted: SLEEP LIKE A BABY IN THE CITY OF LIGHTS. SLUMBER AT THE PARIS RITZ. He turned and gazed tiredly into the full-length mirror across the room. The man staring back at him was a stranger—tousled and weary.
You need a vacation, Robert.
The past year had taken a heavy toll on him, but he didn't appreciate seeing proof in the mirror. His usually sharp blue eyes looked hazy and drawn tonight. A dark stubble was shrouding his strong jaw and dimpled chin. Around his temples, the gray highlights were advancing, making their way deeper into his thicket of coarse black hair. Although his female colleagues insisted the gray only accentuated his bookish appeal, Langdon knew better.
If Boston Magazine could see me now.
Last month, much to Langdon's embarrassment, Boston Magazine had listed him as one of that city's top ten most intriguing people—a dubious honor that made him the brunt of endless ribbing by his Harvard colleagues. Tonight, three thousand miles from home, the accolade had resurfaced to haunt him at the lecture he had given.
"Ladies and gentlemen..." the hostess had announced to a full house at the American University of Paris's Pavilion Dauphine, "Our guest tonight needs no introduction. He is the author of numerous books: The Symbology of Secret Sects, The An of the Illuminati, The Lost Language of Ideograms, and when I say he wrote the book on Religious Iconology, I mean that quite literally. Many of you use his textbooks in class."
The students in the crowd nodded enthusiastically.

"I had planned to introduce him tonight by sharing his impressive curriculum vitae. However..." She glanced playfully at Langdon, who was seated onstage. "An audience member has just handed me a far more, shall we say... intriguing introduction."
She held up a copy of Boston Magazine.
Langdon cringed. Where the hell did she get that?
The hostess began reading choice excerpts from the inane article, and Langdon felt himself sinking lower and lower in his chair. Thirty seconds later, the crowd was grinning, and the woman showed no signs of letting up. "And Mr. Langdon's refusal to speak publicly about his unusual role in last year's Vatican conclave certainly wins him points on our intrigue-o-meter." The hostess goaded the crowd. "Would you like to hear more?"
The crowd applauded.
Somebody stop her, Langdon pleaded as she dove into the article again.
"Although Professor Langdon might not be considered hunk-handsome like some of our younger awardees, this forty-something academic has more than his share of scholarly allure. His captivating presence is punctuated by an unusually low, baritone speaking voice, which his female students describe as 'chocolate for the ears.' "
The hall erupted in laughter.
Langdon forced an awkward smile. He knew what came next—some ridiculous line about "Harrison Ford in Harris tweed"—and because this evening he had figured it was finally safe again to wear his Harris tweed and Burberry turtleneck, he decided to take action.
"Thank you, Monique," Langdon said, standing prematurely and edging her away from the podium. "Boston Magazine clearly has a gift for fiction." He turned to the audience with an embarrassed sigh. "And if I find which one of you provided that article, I'll have the consulate deport you."
The crowd laughed.
"Well, folks, as you all know, I'm here tonight to talk about the power of symbols..." 
The ringing of Langdon's hotel phone once again broke the silence.

Groaning in disbelief, he picked up. "Yes?"
As expected, it was the concierge. "Mr. Langdon, again my apologies. I am calling to inform you that your guest is now en route to your room. I thought I should alert you."
Langdon was wide awake now. "You sent someone to my room?"
"I apologize, monsieur, but a man like this... I cannot presume the authority to stop him."
"Who exactly is he?"
But the concierge was gone.
Almost immediately, a heavy fist pounded on Langdon's door.
Uncertain, Langdon slid off the bed, feeling his toes sink deep into the savonniere carpet. He donned the hotel bathrobe and moved toward the door. "Who is it?"
"Mr. Langdon? I need to speak with you." The man's English was accented—a sharp, authoritative bark. "My name is Lieutenant Jerome Collet. Direction Centrale Police Judiciaire."
Langdon paused. The Judicial Police? The DCPJ was the rough equivalent of the U.S. FBI.
Leaving the security chain in place, Langdon opened the door a few inches. The face staring back at him was thin and washed out. The man was exceptionally lean, dressed in an official-looking blue uniform.
"May I come in?" the agent asked.
Langdon hesitated, feeling uncertain as the stranger's sallow eyes studied him. "What is this all about?"
"My capitaine requires your expertise in a private matter."
"Now?" Langdon managed. "It's after midnight."
"Am I correct that you were scheduled to meet with the curator of the Louvre this evening?"
Langdon felt a sudden surge of uneasiness. He and the revered curator Jacques Saunière had been slated to meet for drinks after Langdon's lecture tonight, but Saunière had never shown up. "Yes. How did you know that?"
"We found your name in his daily planner."

"I trust nothing is wrong?"
The agent gave a dire sigh and slid a Polaroid snapshot through the narrow opening in the door.
When Langdon saw the photo, his entire body went rigid.
"This photo was taken less than an hour ago. Inside the Louvre."
As Langdon stared at the bizarre image, his initial revulsion and shock gave way to a sudden upwelling of anger. "Who would do this!"
"We had hoped that you might help us answer that very question, considering your knowledge in symbology and your plans to meet with him."
Langdon stared at the picture, his horror now laced with fear. The image was gruesome and profoundly strange, bringing with it an unsettling sense of déjà vu. A little over a year ago, Langdon had received a photograph of a corpse and a similar request for help. Twenty-four hours later, he had almost lost his life inside Vatican City. This photo was entirely different, and yet something about the scenario felt disquietingly familiar.
The agent checked his watch. "My capitaine is waiting, sir."
Langdon barely heard him. His eyes were still riveted on the picture. "This symbol here, and the way his body is so oddly..."
"Positioned?" the agent offered.
Langdon nodded, feeling a chill as he looked up. "I can't imagine who would do this to someone."
The agent looked grim. "You don't understand, Mr. Langdon. What you see in this photograph..." He paused. "Monsieur Saunière did that to himself." 
CHAPTER 2
One mile away, the hulking albino named Silas limped through the front gate of the luxurious brownstone residence on Rue La Bruyère. The spiked cilice belt that he wore around his thigh cut into his flesh, and yet his soul sang with satisfaction of service to the Lord.
Pain is good.

His red eyes scanned the lobby as he entered the residence. Empty. He climbed the stairs quietly, not wanting to awaken any of his fellow numeraries. His bedroom door was open; locks were forbidden here. He entered, closing the door behind him.
The room was spartan—hardwood floors, a pine dresser, a canvas mat in the corner that served as his bed. He was a visitor here this week, and yet for many years he had been blessed with a similar sanctuary in New York City.
The Lord has provided me shelter and purpose in my life.
Tonight, at last, Silas felt he had begun to repay his debt. Hurrying to the dresser, he found the cell phone hidden in his bottom drawer and placed a call.
"Yes?" a male voice answered.
"Teacher, I have returned."
"Speak," the voice commanded, sounding pleased to hear from him.
"All four are gone. The three sénéchaux... and the Grand Master himself."
There was a momentary pause, as if for prayer. "Then I assume you have the information?"
"All four concurred. Independently."
"And you believed them?"
"Their agreement was too great for coincidence."
An excited breath. "Excellent. I had feared the brotherhood's reputation for secrecy might prevail."
"The prospect of death is strong motivation."
"So, my pupil, tell me what I must know."
Silas knew the information he had gleaned from his victims would come as a shock. "Teacher, all four confirmed the existence of the clef de voûte... the legendary keystone."
He heard a quick intake of breath over the phone and could feel the Teacher's excitement. "The keystone. Exactly as we suspected."
According to lore, the brotherhood had created a map of stone—a clef de voûte... or keystone—an engraved tablet that revealed the final resting place of the brotherhood's greatest secret... 

information so powerful that its protection was the reason for the brotherhood's very existence.
"When we possess the keystone," the Teacher said, "we will be only one step away."
"We are closer than you think. The keystone is here in Paris."
"Paris? Incredible. It is almost too easy."
Silas relayed the earlier events of the evening... how all four of his victims, moments before death, had desperately tried to buy back their godless lives by telling their secret. Each had told Silas the exact same thing—that the keystone was ingeniously hidden at a precise location inside one of Paris's ancient churches—the Eglise de Saint-Sulpice.
"Inside a house of the Lord," the Teacher exclaimed. "How they mock us!"
"As they have for centuries."
The Teacher fell silent, as if letting the triumph of this moment settle over him. Finally, he spoke. "You have done a great service to God. We have waited centuries for this. You must retrieve the stone for me. Immediately. Tonight. You understand the stakes."
Silas knew the stakes were incalculable, and yet what the Teacher was now commanding seemed impossible. "But the church, it is a fortress. Especially at night. How will I enter?"
With the confident tone of a man of enormous influence, the Teacher explained what was to be done. 
When Silas hung up the phone, his skin tingled with anticipation.
One hour, he told himself, grateful that the Teacher had given him time to carry out the necessary penance before entering a house of God. I must purge my soul of today's sins. The sins committed today had been holy in purpose. Acts of war against the enemies of God had been committed for centuries. Forgiveness was assured.
Even so, Silas knew, absolution required sacrifice.
Pulling his shades, he stripped naked and knelt in the center of his room. Looking down, he examined the spiked cilice belt clamped around his thigh. All true followers of The Way wore this device—a leather strap, studded with sharp metal barbs that cut into the flesh as a perpetual reminder of Christ's suffering. The pain caused by the device also helped counteract the desires of the flesh.

Although Silas already had worn his cilice today longer than the requisite two hours, he knew today was no ordinary day. Grasping the buckle, he cinched it one notch tighter, wincing as the barbs dug deeper into his flesh. Exhaling slowly, he savored the cleansing ritual of his pain.
Pain is good, Silas whispered, repeating the sacred mantra of Father Josemaría Escrivá—the Teacher of all Teachers. Although Escrivá had died in 1975, his wisdom lived on, his words still whispered by thousands of faithful servants around the globe as they knelt on the floor and performed the sacred practice known as "corporal mortification."
Silas turned his attention now to a heavy knotted rope coiled neatly on the floor beside him. The Discipline. The knots were caked with dried blood. Eager for the purifying effects of his own agony, Silas said a quick prayer. Then, gripping one end of the rope, he closed his eyes and swung it hard over his shoulder, feeling the knots slap against his back. He whipped it over his shoulder again, slashing at his flesh. Again and again, he lashed.
Castigo corpus meum.
Finally, he felt the blood begin to flow. 
CHAPTER 3
The crisp April air whipped through the open window of the Citroën ZX as it skimmed south past the Opera House and crossed Place Vendôme. In the passenger seat, Robert Langdon felt the city tear past him as he tried to clear his thoughts. His quick shower and shave had left him looking reasonably presentable but had done little to ease his anxiety. The frightening image of the curator's body remained locked in his mind.
Jacques Saunière is dead.
Langdon could not help but feel a deep sense of loss at the curator's death. Despite Saunière's reputation for being reclusive, his recognition for dedication to the arts made him an easy man to revere. His books on the secret codes hidden in the paintings of Poussin and Teniers were some of Langdon's favorite classroom texts. Tonight's meeting had been one Langdon was very much looking forward to, and he was disappointed when the curator had not shown.
Again the image of the curator's body flashed in his mind. Jacques Saunière did that to himself? Langdon turned and looked out the window, forcing the picture from his mind.
Outside, the city was just now winding down—street vendors wheeling carts of candied amandes, waiters carrying bags of garbage to the curb, a pair of late night lovers cuddling to stay warm in a 

breeze scented with jasmine blossom. The Citroën navigated the chaos with authority, its dissonant two-tone siren parting the traffic like a knife.
"Le capitaine was pleased to discover you were still in Paris tonight," the agent said, speaking for the first time since they'd left the hotel. "A fortunate coincidence."
Langdon was feeling anything but fortunate, and coincidence was a concept he did not entirely trust. As someone who had spent his life exploring the hidden interconnectivity of disparate emblems and ideologies, Langdon viewed the world as a web of profoundly intertwined histories and events. The connections may be invisible, he often preached to his symbology classes at Harvard, but they are always there, buried just beneath the surface.
"I assume," Langdon said, "that the American University of Paris told you where I was staying?"
The driver shook his head. "Interpol."
Interpol, Langdon thought. Of course. He had forgotten that the seemingly innocuous request of all European hotels to see a passport at check-in was more than a quaint formality—it was the law. On any given night, all across Europe, Interpol officials could pinpoint exactly who was sleeping where. Finding Langdon at the Ritz had probably taken all of five seconds.
As the Citroën accelerated southward across the city, the illuminated profile of the Eiffel Tower appeared, shooting skyward in the distance to the right. Seeing it, Langdon thought of Vittoria, recalling their playful promise a year ago that every six months they would meet again at a different romantic spot on the globe. The Eiffel Tower, Langdon suspected, would have made their list. Sadly, he last kissed Vittoria in a noisy airport in Rome more than a year ago.
"Did you mount her?" the agent asked, looking over.
Langdon glanced up, certain he had misunderstood. "I beg your pardon?"
"She is lovely, no?" The agent motioned through the windshield toward the Eiffel Tower. "Have you mounted her?"
Langdon rolled his eyes. "No, I haven't climbed the tower."
"She is the symbol of France. I think she is perfect."
Langdon nodded absently. Symbologists often remarked that France—a country renowned for machismo, womanizing, and diminutive insecure leaders like Napoleon and Pepin the Short—could not have chosen a more apt national emblem than a thousand-foot phallus.
When they reached the intersection at Rue de Rivoli, the traffic light was red, but the Citroën didn't 

slow. The agent gunned the sedan across the junction and sped onto a wooded section of Rue Castiglione, which served as the northern entrance to the famed Tuileries Gardens—Paris's own version of Central Park. Most tourists mistranslated Jardins des Tuileries as relating to the thousands of tulips that bloomed here, but Tuileries was actually a literal reference to something far less romantic. This park had once been an enormous, polluted excavation pit from which Parisian contractors mined clay to manufacture the city's famous red roofing tiles—or tuiles.
As they entered the deserted park, the agent reached under the dash and turned off the blaring siren. Langdon exhaled, savoring the sudden quiet. Outside the car, the pale wash of halogen headlights skimmed over the crushed gravel parkway, the rugged whir of the tires intoning a hypnotic rhythm. Langdon had always considered the Tuileries to be sacred ground. These were the gardens in which Claude Monet had experimented with form and color, and literally inspired the birth of the Impressionist movement. Tonight, however, this place held a strange aura of foreboding.
The Citroën swerved left now, angling west down the park's central boulevard. Curling around a circular pond, the driver cut across a desolate avenue out into a wide quadrangle beyond. Langdon could now see the end of the Tuileries Gardens, marked by a giant stone archway.
Arc du Carrousel.
Despite the orgiastic rituals once held at the Arc du Carrousel, art aficionados revered this place for another reason entirely. From the esplanade at the end of the Tuileries, four of the finest art museums in the world could be seen... one at each point of the compass.
Out the right-hand window, south across the Seine and Quai Voltaire, Langdon could see the dramatically lit facade of the old train station—now the esteemed Musée d'Orsay. Glancing left, he could make out the top of the ultramodern Pompidou Center, which housed the Museum of Modern Art. Behind him to the west, Langdon knew the ancient obelisk of Ramses rose above the trees, marking the Musée du Jeu de Paume.
But it was straight ahead, to the east, through the archway, that Langdon could now see the monolithic Renaissance palace that had become the most famous art museum in the world.
Musée du Louvre.
Langdon felt a familiar tinge of wonder as his eyes made a futile attempt to absorb the entire mass of the edifice. Across a staggeringly expansive plaza, the imposing facade of the Louvre rose like a citadel against the Paris sky. Shaped like an enormous horseshoe, the Louvre was the longest building in Europe, stretching farther than three Eiffel Towers laid end to end. Not even the million square feet of open plaza between the museum wings could challenge the majesty of the facade's breadth. Langdon had once walked the Louvre's entire perimeter, an astonishing three-mile journey.

Despite the estimated five days it would take a visitor to properly appreciate the 65,300 pieces of art in this building, most tourists chose an abbreviated experience Langdon referred to as "Louvre Lite"—a full sprint through the museum to see the three most famous objects: the Mona Lisa, Venus de Milo, and Winged Victory. Art Buchwald had once boasted he'd seen all three masterpieces in five minutes and fifty-six seconds.
The driver pulled out a handheld walkie-talkie and spoke in rapid-fire French. "Monsieur Langdon est arrivé. Deux minutes."
An indecipherable confirmation came crackling back.
The agent stowed the device, turning now to Langdon. "You will meet the capitaine at the main entrance."
The driver ignored the signs prohibiting auto traffic on the plaza, revved the engine, and gunned the Citroën up over the curb. The Louvre's main entrance was visible now, rising boldly in the distance, encircled by seven triangular pools from which spouted illuminated fountains.
La Pyramide.
The new entrance to the Paris Louvre had become almost as famous as the museum itself. The controversial, neomodern glass pyramid designed by Chinese-born American architect I. M. Pei still evoked scorn from traditionalists who felt it destroyed the dignity of the Renaissance courtyard. Goethe had described architecture as frozen music, and Pei's critics described this pyramid as fingernails on a chalkboard. Progressive admirers, though, hailed Pei's seventy-one-foot-tall transparent pyramid as a dazzling synergy of ancient structure and modern method—a symbolic link between the old and new—helping usher the Louvre into the next millennium.
"Do you like our pyramid?" the agent asked.
Langdon frowned. The French, it seemed, loved to ask Americans this. It was a loaded question, of course. Admitting you liked the pyramid made you a tasteless American, and expressing dislike was an insult to the French.
"Mitterrand was a bold man," Langdon replied, splitting the difference. The late French president who had commissioned the pyramid was said to have suffered from a "Pharaoh complex." Singlehandedly responsible for filling Paris with Egyptian obelisks, art, and artifacts.
François Mitterrand had an affinity for Egyptian culture that was so all-consuming that the French still referred to him as the Sphinx.
"What is the captain's name?" Langdon asked, changing topics.

"Bezu Fache," the driver said, approaching the pyramid's main entrance. "We call him le Taureau."
Langdon glanced over at him, wondering if every Frenchman had a mysterious animal epithet. "You call your captain the Bull?"
The man arched his eyebrows. "Your French is better than you admit, Monsieur Langdon."
My French stinks, Langdon thought, but my zodiac iconography is pretty good. Taurus was always the bull. Astrology was a symbolic constant all over the world.
The agent pulled the car to a stop and pointed between two fountains to a large door in the side of the pyramid. "There is the entrance. Good luck, monsieur."
"You're not coming?"
"My orders are to leave you here. I have other business to attend to."
Langdon heaved a sigh and climbed out. It's your circus.
The agent revved his engine and sped off.
As Langdon stood alone and watched the departing taillights, he realized he could easily reconsider, exit the courtyard, grab a taxi, and head home to bed. Something told him it was probably a lousy idea.
As he moved toward the mist of the fountains, Langdon had the uneasy sense he was crossing an imaginary threshold into another world. The dreamlike quality of the evening was settling around him again. Twenty minutes ago he had been asleep in his hotel room. Now he was standing in front of a transparent pyramid built by the Sphinx, waiting for a policeman they called the Bull.
I'm trapped in a Salvador Dali painting, he thought.
Langdon strode to the main entrance—an enormous revolving door. The foyer beyond was dimly lit and deserted.
Do I knock?
Langdon wondered if any of Harvard's revered Egyptologists had ever knocked on the front door of a pyramid and expected an answer. He raised his hand to bang on the glass, but out of the darkness below, a figure appeared, striding up the curving staircase. The man was stocky and dark, almost Neanderthal, dressed in a dark double-breasted suit that strained to cover his wide shoulders. He advanced with unmistakable authority on squat, powerful legs. He was speaking on his cell phone but finished the call as he arrived. He motioned for Langdon to enter.

"I am Bezu Fache," he announced as Langdon pushed through the revolving door. "Captain of the Central Directorate Judicial Police." His tone was fitting—a guttural rumble... like a gathering storm.
Langdon held out his hand to shake. "Robert Langdon."
Fache's enormous palm wrapped around Langdon's with crushing force.
"I saw the photo," Langdon said. "Your agent said Jacques Saunière himself did—"
"Mr. Langdon," Fache's ebony eyes locked on. "What you see in the photo is only the beginning of what Saunière did." 
CHAPTER 4
Captain Bezu Fache carried himself like an angry ox, with his wide shoulders thrown back and his chin tucked hard into his chest. His dark hair was slicked back with oil, accentuating an arrow-like widow's peak that divided his jutting brow and preceded him like the prow of a battleship. As he advanced, his dark eyes seemed to scorch the earth before him, radiating a fiery clarity that forecast his reputation for unblinking severity in all matters.
Langdon followed the captain down the famous marble staircase into the sunken atrium beneath the glass pyramid. As they descended, they passed between two armed Judicial Police guards with machine guns. The message was clear: Nobody goes in or out tonight without the blessing of Captain Fache.
Descending below ground level, Langdon fought a rising trepidation. Fache's presence was anything but welcoming, and the Louvre itself had an almost sepulchral aura at this hour. The staircase, like the aisle of a dark movie theater, was illuminated by subtle tread-lighting embedded in each step. Langdon could hear his own footsteps reverberating off the glass overhead. As he glanced up, he could see the faint illuminated wisps of mist from the fountains fading away outside the transparent roof.
"Do you approve?" Fache asked, nodding upward with his broad chin.
Langdon sighed, too tired to play games. "Yes, your pyramid is magnificent."
Fache grunted. "A scar on the face of Paris."
Strike one. Langdon sensed his host was a hard man to please. He wondered if Fache had any idea 

that this pyramid, at President Mitterrand's explicit demand, had been constructed of exactly 666 panes of glass—a bizarre request that had always been a hot topic among conspiracy buffs who claimed 666 was the number of Satan.
Langdon decided not to bring it up.
As they dropped farther into the subterranean foyer, the yawning space slowly emerged from the shadows. Built fifty-seven feet beneath ground level, the Louvre's newly constructed 70,000-square-foot lobby spread out like an endless grotto. Constructed in warm ocher marble to be compatible with the honey-colored stone of the Louvre facade above, the subterranean hall was usually vibrant with sunlight and tourists. Tonight, however, the lobby was barren and dark, giving the entire space a cold and crypt-like atmosphere.
"And the museum's regular security staff?" Langdon asked.
"En quarantaine," Fache replied, sounding as if Langdon were questioning the integrity of Fache's team. "Obviously, someone gained entry tonight who should not have. All Louvre night wardens are in the Sully Wing being questioned. My own agents have taken over museum security for the evening."
Langdon nodded, moving quickly to keep pace with Fache.
"How well did you know Jacques Saunière?" the captain asked.
"Actually, not at all. We'd never met."
Fache looked surprised. "Your first meeting was to be tonight?"
"Yes. We'd planned to meet at the American University reception following my lecture, but he never showed up."
Fache scribbled some notes in a little book. As they walked, Langdon caught a glimpse of the Louvre's lesser-known pyramid—La Pyramide Inversée—a huge inverted skylight that hung from the ceiling like a stalactite in an adjoining section of the entresol. Fache guided Langdon up a short set of stairs to the mouth of an arched tunnel, over which a sign read: DENON. The Denon Wing was the most famous of the Louvre's three main sections.
"Who requested tonight's meeting?" Fache asked suddenly. "You or he?"
The question seemed odd. "Mr. Saunière did," Langdon replied as they entered the tunnel. "His secretary contacted me a few weeks ago via e-mail. She said the curator had heard I would be lecturing in Paris this month and wanted to discuss something with me while I was here."

"Discuss what?"
"I don't know. Art, I imagine. We share similar interests."
Fache looked skeptical. "You have no idea what your meeting was about?"
Langdon did not. He'd been curious at the time but had not felt comfortable demanding specifics. The venerated Jacques Saunière had a renowned penchant for privacy and granted very few meetings; Langdon was grateful simply for the opportunity to meet him.
"Mr. Langdon, can you at least guess what our murder victim might have wanted to discuss with you on the night he was killed? It might be helpful."
The pointedness of the question made Langdon uncomfortable. "I really can't imagine. I didn't ask. I felt honored to have been contacted at all. I'm an admirer of Mr. Saunière's work. I use his texts often in my classes."
Fache made note of that fact in his book.
The two men were now halfway up the Denon Wing's entry tunnel, and Langdon could see the twin ascending escalators at the far end, both motionless.
"So you shared interests with him?" Fache asked.
"Yes. In fact, I've spent much of the last year writing the draft for a book that deals with Mr. Saunière's primary area of expertise. I was looking forward to picking his brain."
Fache glanced up. "Pardon?"
The idiom apparently didn't translate. "I was looking forward to learning his thoughts on the topic."
"I see. And what is the topic?"
Langdon hesitated, uncertain exactly how to put it. "Essentially, the manuscript is about the iconography of goddess worship—the concept of female sanctity and the art and symbols associated with it."
Fache ran a meaty hand across his hair. "And Saunière was knowledgeable about this?"
"Nobody more so."
"I see."

Langdon sensed Fache did not see at all. Jacques Saunière was considered the premiere goddess iconographer on earth. Not only did Saunière have a personal passion for relics relating to fertility, goddess cults, Wicca, and the sacred feminine, but during his twenty-year tenure as curator, Saunière had helped the Louvre amass the largest collection of goddess art on earth—labrys axes from the priestesses' oldest Greek shrine in Delphi, gold caducei wands, hundreds of Tjet ankhs resembling small standing angels, sistrum rattles used in ancient Egypt to dispel evil spirits, and an astonishing array of statues depicting Horus being nursed by the goddess Isis.
"Perhaps Jacques Saunière knew of your manuscript?" Fache offered. "And he called the meeting to offer his help on your book."
Langdon shook his head. "Actually, nobody yet knows about my manuscript. It's still in draft form, and I haven't shown it to anyone except my editor."
Fache fell silent.
Langdon did not add the reason he hadn't yet shown the manuscript to anyone else. The three-hundred-page draft—tentatively titled Symbols of the Lost Sacred Feminine—proposed some very unconventional interpretations of established religious iconography which would certainly be controversial.
Now, as Langdon approached the stationary escalators, he paused, realizing Fache was no longer beside him. Turning, Langdon saw Fache standing several yards back at a service elevator.
"We'll take the elevator," Fache said as the lift doors opened. "As I'm sure you're aware, the gallery is quite a distance on foot."
Although Langdon knew the elevator would expedite the long, two-story climb to the Denon Wing, he remained motionless.
"Is something wrong?" Fache was holding the door, looking impatient.
Langdon exhaled, turning a longing glance back up the open-air escalator. Nothing's wrong at all, he lied to himself, trudging back toward the elevator. As a boy, Langdon had fallen down an abandoned well shaft and almost died treading water in the narrow space for hours before being rescued. Since then, he'd suffered a haunting phobia of enclosed spaces—elevators, subways, squash courts. The elevator is a perfectly safe machine, Langdon continually told himself, never believing it. It's a tiny metal box hanging in an enclosed shaft! Holding his breath, he stepped into the lift, feeling the familiar tingle of adrenaline as the doors slid shut. Two floors. Ten seconds.
"You and Mr. Saunière," Fache said as the lift began to move, "you never spoke at all? Never corresponded? Never sent each other anything in the mail?"

Another odd question. Langdon shook his head. "No. Never." Fache cocked his head, as if making a mental note of that fact. Saying nothing, he stared dead ahead at the chrome doors.
As they ascended, Langdon tried to focus on anything other than the four walls around him. In the reflection of the shiny elevator door, he saw the captain's tie clip—a silver crucifix with thirteen embedded pieces of black onyx. Langdon found it vaguely surprising. The symbol was known as a crux gemmata—a cross bearing thirteen gems—a Christian ideogram for Christ and His twelve apostles. Somehow Langdon had not expected the captain of the French police to broadcast his religion so openly. Then again, this was France; Christianity was not a religion here so much as a birthright.
"It's a crux gemmata" Fache said suddenly.
Startled, Langdon glanced up to find Fache's eyes on him in the reflection.
The elevator jolted to a stop, and the doors opened.
Langdon stepped quickly out into the hallway, eager for the wide-open space afforded by the famous high ceilings of the Louvre galleries. The world into which he stepped, however, was nothing like he expected.
Surprised, Langdon stopped short.
Fache glanced over. "I gather, Mr. Langdon, you have never seen the Louvre after hours?"
I guess not, Langdon thought, trying to get his bearings.
Usually impeccably illuminated, the Louvre galleries were startlingly dark tonight. Instead of the customary flat-white light flowing down from above, a muted red glow seemed to emanate upward from the baseboards—intermittent patches of red light spilling out onto the tile floors.
As Langdon gazed down the murky corridor, he realized he should have anticipated this scene. Virtually all major galleries employed red service lighting at night—strategically placed, low-level, noninvasive lights that enabled staff members to navigate hallways and yet kept the paintings in relative darkness to slow the fading effects of overexposure to light. Tonight, the museum possessed an almost oppressive quality. Long shadows encroached everywhere, and the usually soaring vaulted ceilings appeared as a low, black void.
"This way," Fache said, turning sharply right and setting out through a series of interconnected galleries.
Langdon followed, his vision slowly adjusting to the dark. All around, large-format oils began to materialize like photos developing before him in an enormous darkroom... their eyes following as 

he moved through the rooms. He could taste the familiar tang of museum air—an arid, deionized essence that carried a faint hint of carbon—the product of industrial, coal-filter dehumidifiers that ran around the clock to counteract the corrosive carbon dioxide exhaled by visitors.
Mounted high on the walls, the visible security cameras sent a clear message to visitors: We see you. Do not touch anything.
"Any of them real?" Langdon asked, motioning to the cameras.
Fache shook his head. "Of course not."
Langdon was not surprised. Video surveillance in museums this size was cost-prohibitive and ineffective. With acres of galleries to watch over, the Louvre would require several hundred technicians simply to monitor the feeds. Most large museums now used "containment security." Forget keeping thieves out. Keep them in. Containment was activated after hours, and if an intruder removed a piece of artwork, compartmentalized exits would seal around that gallery, and the thief would find himself behind bars even before the police arrived.
The sound of voices echoed down the marble corridor up ahead. The noise seemed to be coming from a large recessed alcove that lay ahead on the right. A bright light spilled out into the hallway.
"Office of the curator," the captain said.
As he and Fache drew nearer the alcove, Langdon peered down a short hallway, into Saunière's luxurious study—warm wood, Old Master paintings, and an enormous antique desk on which stood a two-foot-tall model of a knight in full armor. A handful of police agents bustled about the room, talking on phones and taking notes. One of them was seated at Saunière's desk, typing into a laptop. Apparently, the curator's private office had become DCPJ's makeshift command post for the evening.
"Messieurs," Fache called out, and the men turned. "Ne nous dérangez pas sous aucun prétexte. Entendu?"
Everyone inside the office nodded their understanding.
Langdon had hung enough NE PAS DERANGER signs on hotel room doors to catch the gist of the captain's orders. Fache and Langdon were not to be disturbed under any circumstances.
Leaving the small congregation of agents behind, Fache led Langdon farther down the darkened hallway. Thirty yards ahead loomed the gateway to the Louvre's most popular section—la Grande Galerie—a seemingly endless corridor that housed the Louvre's most valuable Italian masterpieces. Langdon had already discerned that this was where Saunière's body lay; the Grand Gallery's famous parquet floor had been unmistakable in the Polaroid.

As they approached, Langdon saw the entrance was blocked by an enormous steel grate that looked like something used by medieval castles to keep out marauding armies.
"Containment security," Fache said, as they neared the grate.
Even in the darkness, the barricade looked like it could have restrained a tank. Arriving outside, Langdon peered through the bars into the dimly lit caverns of the Grand Gallery.
"After you, Mr. Langdon," Fache said.
Langdon turned. After me, where?
Fache motioned toward the floor at the base of the grate.
Langdon looked down. In the darkness, he hadn't noticed. The barricade was raised about two feet, providing an awkward clearance underneath.
"This area is still off limits to Louvre security," Fache said. "My team from Police Technique et Scientifique has just finished their investigation." He motioned to the opening. "Please slide under."
Langdon stared at the narrow crawl space at his feet and then up at the massive iron grate. He's kidding, right? The barricade looked like a guillotine waiting to crush intruders.
Fache grumbled something in French and checked his watch. Then he dropped to his knees and slithered his bulky frame underneath the grate. On the other side, he stood up and looked back through the bars at Langdon.
Langdon sighed. Placing his palms flat on the polished parquet, he lay on his stomach and pulled himself forward. As he slid underneath, the nape of his Harris tweed snagged on the bottom of the grate, and he cracked the back of his head on the iron.
Very suave, Robert, he thought, fumbling and then finally pulling himself through. As he stood up, Langdon was beginning to suspect it was going to be a very long night. 
CHAPTER 5
Murray Hill Place—the new Opus Dei World Headquarters and conference center—is located at 243 Lexington Avenue in New York City. With a price tag of just over $47 million, the 133,000-square-foot tower is clad in red brick and Indiana limestone. Designed by May & Pinska, the building contains over one hundred bedrooms, six dining rooms, libraries, living rooms, meeting 

rooms, and offices. The second, eighth, and sixteenth floors contain chapels, ornamented with mill-work and marble. The seventeenth floor is entirely residential. Men enter the building through the main doors on Lexington Avenue. Women enter through a side street and are "acoustically and visually separated" from the men at all times within the building.
Earlier this evening, within the sanctuary of his penthouse apartment, Bishop Manuel Aringarosa had packed a small travel bag and dressed in a traditional black cassock. Normally, he would have wrapped a purple cincture around his waist, but tonight he would be traveling among the public, and he preferred not to draw attention to his high office. Only those with a keen eye would notice his 14-karat gold bishop's ring with purple amethyst, large diamonds, and hand-tooled mitre-crozier appliqué. Throwing the travel bag over his shoulder, he said a silent prayer and left his apartment, descending to the lobby where his driver was waiting to take him to the airport.
Now, sitting aboard a commercial airliner bound for Rome, Aringarosa gazed out the window at the dark Atlantic. The sun had already set, but Aringarosa knew his own star was on the rise. Tonight the battle will be won, he thought, amazed that only months ago he had felt powerless against the hands that threatened to destroy his empire.
As president-general of Opus Dei, Bishop Aringarosa had spent the last decade of his life spreading the message of "God's Work"—literally, Opus Dei. The congregation, founded in 1928 by the Spanish priest Josemaría Escrivá, promoted a return to conservative Catholic values and encouraged its members to make sweeping sacrifices in their own lives in order to do the Work of God.
Opus Dei's traditionalist philosophy initially had taken root in Spain before Franco's regime, but with the 1934 publication of Josemaría Escrivá's spiritual book The Way—999 points of meditation for doing God's Work in one's own life—Escrivá's message exploded across the world. Now, with over four million copies of The Way in circulation in forty-two languages, Opus Dei was a global force. Its residence halls, teaching centers, and even universities could be found in almost every major metropolis on earth. Opus Dei was the fastest-growing and most financially secure Catholic organization in the world. Unfortunately, Aringarosa had learned, in an age of religious cynicism, cults, and televangelists, Opus Dei's escalating wealth and power was a magnet for suspicion.
"Many call Opus Dei a brainwashing cult," reporters often challenged. "Others call you an ultraconservative Christian secret society. Which are you?"
"Opus Dei is neither," the bishop would patiently reply. "We are a Catholic Church. We are a congregation of Catholics who have chosen as our priority to follow Catholic doctrine as rigorously as we can in our own daily lives."
"Does God's Work necessarily include vows of chastity, tithing, and atonement for sins through self-flagellation and the cilice?"

"You are describing only a small portion of the Opus Dei population," Aringarosa said. "There are many levels of involvement. Thousands of Opus Dei members are married, have families, and do God's Work in their own communities. Others choose lives of asceticism within our cloistered residence halls. These choices are personal, but everyone in Opus Dei shares the goal of bettering the world by doing the Work of God. Surely this is an admirable quest."
Reason seldom worked, though. The media always gravitated toward scandal, and Opus Dei, like most large organizations, had within its membership a few misguided souls who cast a shadow over the entire group.
Two months ago, an Opus Dei group at a midwestern university had been caught drugging new recruits with mescaline in an effort to induce a euphoric state that neophytes would perceive as a religious experience. Another university student had used his barbed cilice belt more often than the recommended two hours a day and had given himself a near lethal infection. In Boston not long ago, a disillusioned young investment banker had signed over his entire life savings to Opus Dei before attempting suicide.
Misguided sheep, Aringarosa thought, his heart going out to them.
Of course the ultimate embarrassment had been the widely publicized trial of FBI spy Robert Hanssen, who, in addition to being a prominent member of Opus Dei, had turned out to be a sexual deviant, his trial uncovering evidence that he had rigged hidden video cameras in his own bedroom so his friends could watch him having sex with his wife. "Hardly the pastime of a devout Catholic," the judge had noted.
Sadly, all of these events had helped spawn the new watch group known as the Opus Dei Awareness Network (ODAN). The group's popular website—www.odan.org—relayed frightening stories from former Opus Dei members who warned of the dangers of joining. The media was now referring to Opus Dei as "God's Mafia" and "the Cult of Christ."
We fear what we do not understand, Aringarosa thought, wondering if these critics had any idea how many lives Opus Dei had enriched. The group enjoyed the full endorsement and blessing of the Vatican. Opus Dei is a personal prelature of the Pope himself.
Recently, however, Opus Dei had found itself threatened by a force infinitely more powerful than the media... an unexpected foe from which Aringarosa could not possibly hide. Five months ago, the kaleidoscope of power had been shaken, and Aringarosa was still reeling from the blow.
"They know not the war they have begun," Aringarosa whispered to himself, staring out the plane's window at the darkness of the ocean below. For an instant, his eyes refocused, lingering on the reflection of his awkward face—dark and oblong, dominated by a flat, crooked nose that had been shattered by a fist in Spain when he was a young missionary. The physical flaw barely registered now. Aringarosa's was a world of the soul, not of the flesh.

As the jet passed over the coast of Portugal, the cell phone in Aringarosa's cassock began vibrating in silent ring mode. Despite airline regulations prohibiting the use of cell phones during flights, Aringarosa knew this was a call he could not miss. Only one man possessed this number, the man who had mailed Aringarosa the phone.
Excited, the bishop answered quietly. "Yes?"
"Silas has located the keystone," the caller said. "It is in Paris. Within the Church of Saint-Sulpice."
Bishop Aringarosa smiled. "Then we are close."
"We can obtain it immediately. But we need your influence."
"Of course. Tell me what to do."
When Aringarosa switched off the phone, his heart was pounding. He gazed once again into the void of night, feeling dwarfed by the events he had put into motion. 
Five hundred miles away, the albino named Silas stood over a small basin of water and dabbed the blood from his back, watching the patterns of red spinning in the water. Purge me with hyssop and I shall be clean, he prayed, quoting Psalms. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Silas was feeling an aroused anticipation that he had not felt since his previous life. It both surprised and electrified him. For the last decade, he had been following The Way, cleansing himself of sins... rebuilding his life... erasing the violence in his past. Tonight, however, it had all come rushing back. The hatred he had fought so hard to bury had been summoned. He had been startled how quickly his past had resurfaced. And with it, of course, had come his skills. Rusty but serviceable.
Jesus' message is one of peace... of nonviolence... of love. This was the message Silas had been taught from the beginning, and the message he held in his heart. And yet this was the message the enemies of Christ now threatened to destroy. Those who threaten God with force will be met with force. Immovable and steadfast.
For two millennia, Christian soldiers had defended their faith against those who tried to displace it. Tonight, Silas had been called to battle.
Drying his wounds, he donned his ankle-length, hooded robe. It was plain, made of dark wool, accentuating the whiteness of his skin and hair. Tightening the rope-tie around his waist, he raised the hood over his head and allowed his red eyes to admire his reflection in the mirror. The wheels are in motion.

CHAPTER 6
Having squeezed beneath the security gate, Robert Langdon now stood just inside the entrance to the Grand Gallery. He was staring into the mouth of a long, deep canyon. On either side of the gallery, stark walls rose thirty feet, evaporating into the darkness above. The reddish glow of the service lighting sifted upward, casting an unnatural smolder across a staggering collection of Da Vincis, Titians, and Caravaggios that hung suspended from ceiling cables. Still lifes, religious scenes, and landscapes accompanied portraits of nobility and politicians.
Although the Grand Gallery housed the Louvre's most famous Italian art, many visitors felt the wing's most stunning offering was actually its famous parquet floor. Laid out in a dazzling geometric design of diagonal oak slats, the floor produced an ephemeral optical illusion—a multi-dimensional network that gave visitors the sense they were floating through the gallery on a surface that changed with every step.
As Langdon's gaze began to trace the inlay, his eyes stopped short on an unexpected object lying on the floor just a few yards to his left, surrounded by police tape. He spun toward Fache. "Is that... a Caravaggio on the floor?"
Fache nodded without even looking.
The painting, Langdon guessed, was worth upward of two million dollars, and yet it was lying on the floor like a discarded poster. "What the devil is it doing on the floor!"
Fache glowered, clearly unmoved. "This is a crime scene, Mr. Langdon. We have touched nothing. That canvas was pulled from the wall by the curator. It was how he activated the security system."
Langdon looked back at the gate, trying to picture what had happened.
"The curator was attacked in his office, fled into the Grand Gallery, and activated the security gate by pulling that painting from the wall. The gate fell immediately, sealing off all access. This is the only door in or out of this gallery."
Langdon felt confused. "So the curator actually captured his attacker inside the Grand Gallery?"
Fache shook his head. "The security gate separated Saunière from his attacker. The killer was locked out there in the hallway and shot Saunière through this gate." Fache pointed toward an orange tag hanging from one of the bars on the gate under which they had just passed. "The PTS team found flashback residue from a gun. He fired through the bars. Saunière died in here alone."

Langdon pictured the photograph of Saunière's body. They said he did that to himself. Langdon looked out at the enormous corridor before them. "So where is his body?"
Fache straightened his cruciform tie clip and began to walk. "As you probably know, the Grand Gallery is quite long."
The exact length, if Langdon recalled correctly, was around fifteen hundred feet, the length of three Washington Monuments laid end to end. Equally breathtaking was the corridor's width, which easily could have accommodated a pair of side-by-side passenger trains. The center of the hallway was dotted by the occasional statue or colossal porcelain urn, which served as a tasteful divider and kept the flow of traffic moving down one wall and up the other.
Fache was silent now, striding briskly up the right side of the corridor with his gaze dead ahead. Langdon felt almost disrespectful to be racing past so many masterpieces without pausing for so much as a glance.
Not that I could see anything in this lighting, he thought.
The muted crimson lighting unfortunately conjured memories of Langdon's last experience in noninvasive lighting in the Vatican Secret Archives. This was tonight's second unsettling parallel with his near-death in Rome. He flashed on Vittoria again. She had been absent from his dreams for months. Langdon could not believe Rome had been only a year ago; it felt like decades. Another life. His last correspondence from Vittoria had been in December—a postcard saying she was headed to the Java Sea to continue her research in entanglement physics... something about using satellites to track manta ray migrations. Langdon had never harbored delusions that a woman like Vittoria Vetra could have been happy living with him on a college campus, but their encounter in Rome had unlocked in him a longing he never imagined he could feel. His lifelong affinity for bachelorhood and the simple freedoms it allowed had been shaken somehow... replaced by an unexpected emptiness that seemed to have grown over the past year.
They continued walking briskly, yet Langdon still saw no corpse. "Jacques Saunière went this far?"
"Mr. Saunière suffered a bullet wound to his stomach. He died very slowly. Perhaps over fifteen or twenty minutes. He was obviously a man of great personal strength."
Langdon turned, appalled. "Security took fifteen minutes to get here?"
"Of course not. Louvre security responded immediately to the alarm and found the Grand Gallery sealed. Through the gate, they could hear someone moving around at the far end of the corridor, but they could not see who it was. They shouted, but they got no answer. Assuming it could only be a criminal, they followed protocol and called in the Judicial Police. We took up positions within fifteen minutes. When we arrived, we raised the barricade enough to slip underneath, and I sent a 

dozen armed agents inside. They swept the length of the gallery to corner the intruder."
"And?"
"They found no one inside. Except..." He pointed farther down the hall. "Him."
Langdon lifted his gaze and followed Fache's outstretched finger. At first he thought Fache was pointing to a large marble statue in the middle of the hallway. As they continued, though, Langdon began to see past the statue. Thirty yards down the hall, a single spotlight on a portable pole stand shone down on the floor, creating a stark island of white light in the dark crimson gallery. In the center of the light, like an insect under a microscope, the corpse of the curator lay naked on the parquet floor.
"You saw the photograph," Fache said, "so this should be of no surprise."
Langdon felt a deep chill as they approached the body. Before him was one of the strangest images he had ever seen. 
The pallid corpse of Jacques Saunière lay on the parquet floor exactly as it appeared in the photograph. As Langdon stood over the body and squinted in the harsh light, he reminded himself to his amazement that Saunière had spent his last minutes of life arranging his own body in this strange fashion.
Saunière looked remarkably fit for a man of his years... and all of his musculature was in plain view. He had stripped off every shred of clothing, placed it neatly on the floor, and laid down on his back in the center of the wide corridor, perfectly aligned with the long axis of the room. His arms and legs were sprawled outward in a wide spread eagle, like those of a child making a snow angel... or, perhaps more appropriately, like a man being drawn and quartered by some invisible force.
Just below Saunière's breastbone, a bloody smear marked the spot where the bullet had pierced his flesh. The wound had bled surprisingly little, leaving only a small pool of blackened blood.
Saunière's left index finger was also bloody, apparently having been dipped into the wound to create the most unsettling aspect of his own macabre deathbed; using his own blood as ink, and employing his own naked abdomen as a canvas, Saunière had drawn a simple symbol on his flesh—five straight lines that intersected to form a five-pointed star.
The pentacle.
The bloody star, centered on Saunière's navel, gave his corpse a distinctly ghoulish aura. The photo 

Langdon had seen was chilling enough, but now, witnessing the scene in person, Langdon felt a deepening uneasiness.
He did this to himself.
"Mr. Langdon?" Fache's dark eyes settled on him again.
"It's a pentacle," Langdon offered, his voice feeling hollow in the huge space. "One of the oldest symbols on earth. Used over four thousand years before Christ."
"And what does it mean?"
Langdon always hesitated when he got this question. Telling someone what a symbol "meant" was like telling them how a song should make them feel—it was different for all people. A white Ku Klux Klan headpiece conjured images of hatred and racism in the United States, and yet the same costume carried a meaning of religious faith in Spain.
"Symbols carry different meanings in different settings," Langdon said. "Primarily, the pentacle is a pagan religious symbol."
Fache nodded. "Devil worship."
"No," Langdon corrected, immediately realizing his choice of vocabulary should have been clearer.
Nowadays, the term pagan had become almost synonymous with devil worship—a gross misconception. The word's roots actually reached back to the Latin paganus, meaning country-dwellers. "Pagans" were literally unindoctrinated country-folk who clung to the old, rural religions of Nature worship. In fact, so strong was the Church's fear of those who lived in the rural villes that the once innocuous word for "villager"—villain—came to mean a wicked soul.
"The pentacle," Langdon clarified, "is a pre-Christian symbol that relates to Nature worship. The ancients envisioned their world in two halves—masculine and feminine. Their gods and goddesses worked to keep a balance of power. Yin and yang. When male and female were balanced, there was harmony in the world. When they were unbalanced, there was chaos." Langdon motioned to Saunière's stomach. "This pentacle is representative of the female half of all things—a concept religious historians call the 'sacred feminine' or the 'divine goddess.' Saunière, of all people, would know this."
"Saunière drew a goddess symbol on his stomach?"
Langdon had to admit, it seemed odd. "In its most specific interpretation, the pentacle symbolizes Venus—the goddess of female sexual love and beauty."

Fache eyed the naked man, and grunted.
"Early religion was based on the divine order of Nature. The goddess Venus and the planet Venus were one and the same. The goddess had a place in the nighttime sky and was known by many names—Venus, the Eastern Star, Ishtar, Astarte—all of them powerful female concepts with ties to Nature and Mother Earth."
Fache looked more troubled now, as if he somehow preferred the idea of devil worship.
Langdon decided not to share the pentacle's most astonishing property—the graphic origin of its ties to Venus. As a young astronomy student, Langdon had been stunned to learn the planet Venus traced a perfect pentacle across the ecliptic sky every four years. So astonished were the ancients to observe this phenomenon, that Venus and her pentacle became symbols of perfection, beauty, and the cyclic qualities of sexual love. As a tribute to the magic of Venus, the Greeks used her four-year cycle to organize their Olympiads. Nowadays, few people realized that the four-year schedule of modern Olympic Games still followed the cycles of Venus. Even fewer people knew that the five-pointed star had almost become the official Olympic seal but was modified at the last moment—its five points exchanged for five intersecting rings to better reflect the games' spirit of inclusion and harmony.
"Mr. Langdon," Fache said abruptly. "Obviously, the pentacle must also relate to the devil. Your American horror movies make that point clearly."
Langdon frowned. Thank you, Hollywood. The five-pointed star was now a virtual cliché in Satanic serial killer movies, usually scrawled on the wall of some Satanist's apartment along with other alleged demonic symbology. Langdon was always frustrated when he saw the symbol in this context; the pentacle's true origins were actually quite godly.
"I assure you," Langdon said, "despite what you see in the movies, the pentacle's demonic interpretation is historically inaccurate. The original feminine meaning is correct, but the symbolism of the pentacle has been distorted over the millennia. In this case, through bloodshed."
"I'm not sure I follow."
Langdon glanced at Fache's crucifix, uncertain how to phrase his next point. "The Church, sir. Symbols are very resilient, but the pentacle was altered by the early Roman Catholic Church. As part of the Vatican's campaign to eradicate pagan religions and convert the masses to Christianity, the Church launched a smear campaign against the pagan gods and goddesses, recasting their divine symbols as evil."
"Go on."
"This is very common in times of turmoil," Langdon continued. "A newly emerging power will 

take over the existing symbols and degrade them over time in an attempt to erase their meaning. In the battle between the pagan symbols and Christian symbols, the pagans lost; Poseidon's trident became the devil's pitchfork, the wise crone's pointed hat became the symbol of a witch, and Venus's pentacle became a sign of the devil." Langdon paused. "Unfortunately, the United States military has also perverted the pentacle; it's now our foremost symbol of war. We paint it on all our fighter jets and hang it on the shoulders of all our generals." So much for the goddess of love and beauty.
"Interesting." Fache nodded toward the spread-eagle corpse. "And the positioning of the body? What do you make of that?"
Langdon shrugged. "The position simply reinforces the reference to the pentacle and sacred feminine."
Fache's expression clouded. "I beg your pardon?"
"Replication. Repeating a symbol is the simplest way to strengthen its meaning. Jacques Saunière positioned himself in the shape of a five-pointed star." If one pentacle is good, two is better.
Fache's eyes followed the five points of Saunière's arms, legs, and head as he again ran a hand across his slick hair. "Interesting analysis." He paused. "And the nudity?" He grumbled as he spoke the word, sounding repulsed by the sight of an aging male body. "Why did he remove his clothing?"
Damned good question, Langdon thought. He'd been wondering the same thing ever since he first saw the Polaroid. His best guess was that a naked human form was yet another endorsement of Venus—the goddess of human sexuality. Although modern culture had erased much of Venus's association with the male/female physical union, a sharp etymological eye could still spot a vestige of Venus's original meaning in the word "venereal." Langdon decided not to go there.
"Mr. Fache, I obviously can't tell you why Mr. Saunière drew that symbol on himself or placed himself in this way, but I can tell you that a man like Jacques Saunière would consider the pentacle a sign of the female deity. The correlation between this symbol and the sacred feminine is widely known by art historians and symbologists."
"Fine. And the use of his own blood as ink?"
"Obviously he had nothing else to write with."
Fache was silent a moment. "Actually, I believe he used blood such that the police would follow certain forensic procedures."
"I'm sorry?"

"Look at his left hand."
Langdon's eyes traced the length of the curator's pale arm to his left hand but saw nothing. Uncertain, he circled the corpse and crouched down, now noting with surprise that the curator was clutching a large, felt-tipped marker.
"Saunière was holding it when we found him," Fache said, leaving Langdon and moving several yards to a portable table covered with investigation tools, cables, and assorted electronic gear. "As I told you," he said, rummaging around the table, "we have touched nothing. Are you familiar with this kind of pen?"
Langdon knelt down farther to see the pen's label.
STYLO DE LUMIERE NOIRE.
He glanced up in surprise.
The black-light pen or watermark stylus was a specialized felt-tipped marker originally designed by museums, restorers, and forgery police to place invisible marks on items. The stylus wrote in a noncorrosive, alcohol-based fluorescent ink that was visible only under black light. Nowadays, museum maintenance staffs carried these markers on their daily rounds to place invisible "tick marks" on the frames of paintings that needed restoration.
As Langdon stood up, Fache walked over to the spotlight and turned it off. The gallery plunged into sudden darkness.
Momentarily blinded, Langdon felt a rising uncertainty. Fache's silhouette appeared, illuminated in bright purple. He approached carrying a portable light source, which shrouded him in a violet haze.
"As you may know," Fache said, his eyes luminescing in the violet glow, "police use black-light illumination to search crime scenes for blood and other forensic evidence. So you can imagine our surprise..." Abruptly, he pointed the light down at the corpse.
Langdon looked down and jumped back in shock.
His heart pounded as he took in the bizarre sight now glowing before him on the parquet floor. Scrawled in luminescent handwriting, the curator's final words glowed purple beside his corpse. As Langdon stared at the shimmering text, he felt the fog that had surrounded this entire night growing thicker.
Langdon read the message again and looked up at Fache. "What the hell does this mean!"
Fache's eyes shone white. "That, monsieur, is precisely the question you are here to answer."

Not far away, inside Saunière's office, Lieutenant Collet had returned to the Louvre and was huddled over an audio console set up on the curator's enormous desk. With the exception of the eerie, robot-like doll of a medieval knight that seemed to be staring at him from the corner of Saunière's desk, Collet was comfortable. He adjusted his AKG headphones and checked the input levels on the hard-disk recording system. All systems were go. The microphones were functioning flawlessly, and the audio feed was crystal clear.
Le moment de vérité, he mused.
Smiling, he closed his eyes and settled in to enjoy the rest of the conversation now being taped inside the Grand Gallery. 
CHAPTER 7
The modest dwelling within the Church of Saint-Sulpice was located on the second floor of the church itself, to the left of the choir balcony. A two-room suite with a stone floor and minimal furnishings, it had been home to Sister Sandrine Bieil for over a decade. The nearby convent was her formal residence, if anyone asked, but she preferred the quiet of the church and had made herself quite comfortable upstairs with a bed, phone, and hot plate.
As the church's conservatrice d'affaires, Sister Sandrine was responsible for overseeing all nonreligious aspects of church operations—general maintenance, hiring support staff and guides, securing the building after hours, and ordering supplies like communion wine and wafers.
Tonight, asleep in her small bed, she awoke to the shrill of her telephone. Tiredly, she lifted the receiver.
"Soeur Sandrine. Eglise Saint-Sulpice."
"Hello, Sister," the man said in French.
Sister Sandrine sat up. What time is it? Although she recognized her boss's voice, in fifteen years she had never been awoken by him. The abbé was a deeply pious man who went home to bed immediately after mass.
"I apologize if I have awoken you, Sister," the abbé said, his own voice sounding groggy and on edge. "I have a favor to ask of you. I just received a call from an influential American bishop. 

Perhaps you know him? Manuel Aringarosa?"
"The head of Opus Dei?" Of course I know of him. Who in the Church doesn't? Aringarosa's conservative prelature had grown powerful in recent years. Their ascension to grace was jump-started in 1982 when Pope John Paul II unexpectedly elevated them to a "personal prelature of the Pope," officially sanctioning all of their practices. Suspiciously, Opus Dei's elevation occurred the same year the wealthy sect allegedly had transferred almost one billion dollars into the Vatican's Institute for Religious Works—commonly known as the Vatican Bank—bailing it out of an embarrassing bankruptcy. In a second maneuver that raised eyebrows, the Pope placed the founder of Opus Dei on the "fast track" for sainthood, accelerating an often century-long waiting period for canonization to a mere twenty years. Sister Sandrine could not help but feel that Opus Dei's good standing in Rome was suspect, but one did not argue with the Holy See.
"Bishop Aringarosa called to ask me a favor," the abbé told her, his voice nervous. "One of his numeraries is in Paris tonight...."
As Sister Sandrine listened to the odd request, she felt a deepening confusion. "I'm sorry, you say this visiting Opus Dei numerary cannot wait until morning?"
"I'm afraid not. His plane leaves very early. He has always dreamed of seeing Saint-Sulpice."
"But the church is far more interesting by day. The sun's rays through the oculus, the graduated shadows on the gnomon, this is what makes Saint-Sulpice unique."
"Sister, I agree, and yet I would consider it a personal favor if you could let him in tonight. He can be there at... say one o'clock? That's in twenty minutes."
Sister Sandrine frowned. "Of course. It would be my pleasure."
The abbé thanked her and hung up.
Puzzled, Sister Sandrine remained a moment in the warmth of her bed, trying to shake off the cobwebs of sleep. Her sixty-year-old body did not awake as fast as it used to, although tonight's phone call had certainly roused her senses. Opus Dei had always made her uneasy. Beyond the prelature's adherence to the arcane ritual of corporal mortification, their views on women were medieval at best. She had been shocked to learn that female numeraries were forced to clean the men's residence halls for no pay while the men were at mass; women slept on hardwood floors, while the men had straw mats; and women were forced to endure additional requirements of corporal mortification... all as added penance for original sin. It seemed Eve's bite from the apple of knowledge was a debt women were doomed to pay for eternity. Sadly, while most of the Catholic Church was gradually moving in the right direction with respect to women's rights, Opus Dei threatened to reverse the progress. Even so, Sister Sandrine had her orders.

Swinging her legs off the bed, she stood slowly, chilled by the cold stone on the soles of her bare feet. As the chill rose through her flesh, she felt an unexpected apprehension.
Women's intuition?
A follower of God, Sister Sandrine had learned to find peace in the calming voices of her own soul. Tonight, however, those voices were as silent as the empty church around her. 
CHAPTER 8
Langdon couldn't tear his eyes from the glowing purple text scrawled across the parquet floor. Jacques Saunière's final communication seemed as unlikely a departing message as any Langdon could imagine.
The message read:
13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5
O, Draconian devil!
Oh, lame saint! 
Although Langdon had not the slightest idea what it meant, he did understand Fache's instinct that the pentacle had something to do with devil worship.
O, Draconian devil!
Saunière had left a literal reference to the devil. Equally as bizarre was the series of numbers. "Part of it looks like a numeric cipher."
"Yes," Fache said. "Our cryptographers are already working on it. We believe these numbers may be the key to who killed him. Maybe a telephone exchange or some kind of social identification. Do the numbers have any symbolic meaning to you?"
Langdon looked again at the digits, sensing it would take him hours to extract any symbolic meaning. If Saunière had even intended any. To Langdon, the numbers looked totally random. He was accustomed to symbolic progressions that made some semblance of sense, but everything here—the pentacle, the text, the numbers—seemed disparate at the most fundamental level.
"You alleged earlier," Fache said, "that Saunière's actions here were all in an effort to send some sort of message... goddess worship or something in that vein? How does this message fit in?"

Langdon knew the question was rhetorical. This bizarre communiqué obviously did not fit Langdon's scenario of goddess worship at all.
O, Draconian devil? Oh, lame saint?
Fache said, "This text appears to be an accusation of some sort. Wouldn't you agree?"
Langdon tried to imagine the curator's final minutes trapped alone in the Grand Gallery, knowing he was about to die. It seemed logical. "An accusation against his murderer makes sense, I suppose."
"My job, of course, is to put a name to that person. Let me ask you this, Mr. Langdon. To your eye, beyond the numbers, what about this message is most strange?"
Most strange? A dying man had barricaded himself in the gallery, drawn a pentacle on himself, and scrawled a mysterious accusation on the floor. What about the scenario wasn't strange?
"The word 'Draconian'?" he ventured, offering the first thing that came to mind. Langdon was fairly certain that a reference to Draco—the ruthless seventh-century B.C. politician—was an unlikely dying thought. " 'Draconian devil' seems an odd choice of vocabulary."
"Draconian?" Fache's tone came with a tinge of impatience now. "Saunière's choice of vocabulary hardly seems the primary issue here."
Langdon wasn't sure what issue Fache had in mind, but he was starting to suspect that Draco and Fache would have gotten along well.
"Saunière was a Frenchman," Fache said flatly. "He lived in Paris. And yet he chose to write this message..."
"In English," Langdon said, now realizing the captain's meaning.
Fache nodded. "Précisément. Any idea why?"
Langdon knew Saunière spoke impeccable English, and yet the reason he had chosen English as the language in which to write his final words escaped Langdon. He shrugged.
Fache motioned back to the pentacle on Saunière's abdomen. "Nothing to do with devil worship? Are you still certain?"
Langdon was certain of nothing anymore. "The symbology and text don't seem to coincide. I'm sorry I can't be of more help."

"Perhaps this will clarify." Fache backed away from the body and raised the black light again, letting the beam spread out in a wider angle. "And now?"
To Langdon's amazement, a rudimentary circle glowed around the curator's body. Saunière had apparently lay down and swung the pen around himself in several long arcs, essentially inscribing himself inside a circle.
In a flash, the meaning became clear.
"The Vitruvian Man," Langdon gasped. Saunière had created a life-sized replica of Leonardo da Vinci's most famous sketch.
Considered the most anatomically correct drawing of its day, Da Vinci's The Vitruvian Man had become a modern-day icon of culture, appearing on posters, mouse pads, and T-shirts around the world. The celebrated sketch consisted of a perfect circle in which was inscribed a nude male... his arms and legs outstretched in a naked spread eagle.
Da Vinci. Langdon felt a shiver of amazement. The clarity of Saunière's intentions could not be denied. In his final moments of life, the curator had stripped off his clothing and arranged his body in a clear image of Leonardo da Vinci's Vitruvian Man.
The circle had been the missing critical element. A feminine symbol of protection, the circle around the naked man's body completed Da Vinci's intended message—male and female harmony. The question now, though, was why Saunière would imitate a famous drawing.
"Mr. Langdon," Fache said, "certainly a man like yourself is aware that Leonardo da Vinci had a tendency toward the darker arts."
Langdon was surprised by Fache's knowledge of Da Vinci, and it certainly went a long way toward explaining the captain's suspicions about devil worship. Da Vinci had always been an awkward subject for historians, especially in the Christian tradition. Despite the visionary's genius, he was a flamboyant homosexual and worshipper of Nature's divine order, both of which placed him in a perpetual state of sin against God. Moreover, the artist's eerie eccentricities projected an admittedly demonic aura: Da Vinci exhumed corpses to study human anatomy; he kept mysterious journals in illegible reverse handwriting; he believed he possessed the alchemic power to turn lead into gold and even cheat God by creating an elixir to postpone death; and his inventions included horrific, never-before-imagined weapons of war and torture.
Misunderstanding breeds distrust, Langdon thought.
Even Da Vinci's enormous output of breathtaking Christian art only furthered the artist's reputation for spiritual hypocrisy. Accepting hundreds of lucrative Vatican commissions, Da Vinci painted Christian themes not as an expression of his own beliefs but rather as a commercial venture—a 

means of funding a lavish lifestyle. Unfortunately, Da Vinci was a prankster who often amused himself by quietly gnawing at the hand that fed him. He incorporated in many of his Christian paintings hidden symbolism that was anything but Christian—tributes to his own beliefs and a subtle thumbing of his nose at the Church. Langdon had even given a lecture once at the National Gallery in London entitled: "The Secret Life of Leonardo: Pagan Symbolism in Christian Art."
"I understand your concerns," Langdon now said, "but Da Vinci never really practiced any dark arts. He was an exceptionally spiritual man, albeit one in constant conflict with the Church." As Langdon said this, an odd thought popped into his mind. He glanced down at the message on the floor again. O, Draconian devil! Oh, lame saint!
"Yes?" Fache said.
Langdon weighed his words carefully. "I was just thinking that Saunière shared a lot of spiritual ideologies with Da Vinci, including a concern over the Church's elimination of the sacred feminine from modern religion. Maybe, by imitating a famous Da Vinci drawing, Saunière was simply echoing some of their shared frustrations with the modern Church's demonization of the goddess."
Fache's eyes hardened. "You think Saunière is calling the Church a lame saint and a Draconian devil?"
Langdon had to admit it seemed far-fetched, and yet the pentacle seemed to endorse the idea on some level. "All I am saying is that Mr. Saunière dedicated his life to studying the history of the goddess, and nothing has done more to erase that history than the Catholic Church. It seems reasonable that Saunière might have chosen to express his disappointment in his final good-bye."
"Disappointment?" Fache demanded, sounding hostile now. "This message sounds more enraged than disappointed, wouldn't you say?"
Langdon was reaching the end of his patience. "Captain, you asked for my instincts as to what Saunière is trying to say here, and that's what I'm giving you."
"That this is an indictment of the Church?" Fache's jaw tightened as he spoke through clenched teeth. "Mr. Langdon, I have seen a lot of death in my work, and let me tell you something. When a man is murdered by another man, I do not believe his final thoughts are to write an obscure spiritual statement that no one will understand. I believe he is thinking of one thing only." Fache's whispery voice sliced the air. "La vengeance. I believe Saunière wrote this note to tell us who killed him." Langdon stared. "But that makes no sense whatsoever."
"No?"
"No," he fired back, tired and frustrated. "You told me Saunière was attacked in his office by someone he had apparently invited in."

"Yes."
"So it seems reasonable to conclude that the curator knew his attacker."
Fache nodded. "Go on."
"So if Saunière knew the person who killed him, what kind of indictment is this?" He pointed at the floor. "Numeric codes? Lame saints? Draconian devils? Pentacles on his stomach? It's all too cryptic."
Fache frowned as if the idea had never occurred to him. "You have a point."
"Considering the circumstances," Langdon said, "I would assume that if Saunière wanted to tell you who killed him, he would have written down somebody's name."
As Langdon spoke those words, a smug smile crossed Fache's lips for the first time all night. "Précisément," Fache said. "Précisément." 
I am witnessing the work of a master, mused Lieutenant Collet as he tweaked his audio gear and listened to Fache's voice coming through the headphones. The agent supérieur knew it was moments like these that had lifted the captain to the pinnacle of French law enforcement.
Fache will do what no one else dares.
The delicate art of cajoler was a lost skill in modern law enforcement, one that required exceptional poise under pressure. Few men possessed the necessary sangfroid for this kind of operation, but Fache seemed born for it. His restraint and patience bordered on the robotic.
Fache's sole emotion this evening seemed to be one of intense resolve, as if this arrest were somehow personal to him. Fache's briefing of his agents an hour ago had been unusually succinct and assured. I know who murdered Jacques Saunière, Fache had said. You know what to do. No mistakes tonight.
And so far, no mistakes had been made.
Collet was not yet privy to the evidence that had cemented Fache's certainty of their suspect's guilt, but he knew better than to question the instincts of the Bull. Fache's intuition seemed almost supernatural at times. God whispers in his ear, one agent had insisted after a particularly impressive display of Fache's sixth sense. Collet had to admit, if there was a God, Bezu Fache would be on His A-list. The captain attended mass and confession with zealous regularity—far more than the requisite holiday attendance fulfilled by other officials in the name of good public 

relations. When the Pope visited Paris a few years back, Fache had used all his muscle to obtain the honor of an audience. A photo of Fache with the Pope now hung in his office. The Papal Bull, the agents secretly called it.
Collet found it ironic that one of Fache's rare popular public stances in recent years had been his outspoken reaction to the Catholic pedophilia scandal. These priests should be hanged twice! Fache had declared. Once for their crimes against children. And once for shaming the good name of the Catholic Church. Collet had the odd sense it was the latter that angered Fache more.
Turning now to his laptop computer, Collet attended to the other half of his responsibilities here tonight—the GPS tracking system. The image onscreen revealed a detailed floor plan of the Denon Wing, a structural schematic uploaded from the Louvre Security Office. Letting his eyes trace the maze of galleries and hallways, Collet found what he was looking for.
Deep in the heart of the Grand Gallery blinked a tiny red dot.
La marque.
Fache was keeping his prey on a very tight leash tonight. Wisely so. Robert Langdon had proven himself one cool customer. 
CHAPTER 9
To ensure his conversation with Mr. Langdon would not be interrupted, Bezu Fache had turned off his cellular phone. Unfortunately, it was an expensive model equipped with a two-way radio feature, which, contrary to his orders, was now being used by one of his agents to page him.
"Capitaine?" The phone crackled like a walkie-talkie.
Fache felt his teeth clench in rage. He could imagine nothing important enough that Collet would interrupt this surveillance cachée—especially at this critical juncture.
He gave Langdon a calm look of apology. "One moment please." He pulled the phone from his belt and pressed the radio transmission button. "Oui?"
"Capitaine, un agent du Département de Cryptographie est arrivé."
Fache's anger stalled momentarily. A cryptographer? Despite the lousy timing, this was probably good news. Fache, after finding Saunière's cryptic text on the floor, had uploaded photographs of the entire crime scene to the Cryptography Department in hopes someone there could tell him what 

the hell Saunière was trying to say. If a code breaker had now arrived, it most likely meant someone had decrypted Saunière's message.
"I'm busy at the moment," Fache radioed back, leaving no doubt in his tone that a line had been crossed. "Ask the cryptographer to wait at the command post. I'll speak to him when I'm done."
"Her," the voice corrected. "It's Agent Neveu."
Fache was becoming less amused with this call every passing moment. Sophie Neveu was one of DCPJ's biggest mistakes. A young Parisian déchiffreuse who had studied cryptography in England at the Royal Holloway, Sophie Neveu had been foisted on Fache two years ago as part of the ministry's attempt to incorporate more women into the police force. The ministry's ongoing foray into political correctness, Fache argued, was weakening the department. Women not only lacked the physicality necessary for police work, but their mere presence posed a dangerous distraction to the men in the field. As Fache had feared, Sophie Neveu was proving far more distracting than most.
At thirty-two years old, she had a dogged determination that bordered on obstinate. Her eager espousal of Britain's new cryptologic methodology continually exasperated the veteran French cryptographers above her. And by far the most troubling to Fache was the inescapable universal truth that in an office of middle-aged men, an attractive young woman always drew eyes away from the work at hand.
The man on the radio said, "Agent Neveu insisted on speaking to you immediately, Captain. I tried to stop her, but she's on her way into the gallery."
Fache recoiled in disbelief. "Unacceptable! I made it very clear—" 
For a moment, Robert Langdon thought Bezu Fache was suffering a stroke. The captain was mid-sentence when his jaw stopped moving and his eyes bulged. His blistering gaze seemed fixated on something over Langdon's shoulder. Before Langdon could turn to see what it was, he heard a woman's voice chime out behind him.
"Excusez-moi, messieurs."
Langdon turned to see a young woman approaching. She was moving down the corridor toward them with long, fluid strides... a haunting certainty to her gait. Dressed casually in a knee-length, cream-colored Irish sweater over black leggings, she was attractive and looked to be about thirty. Her thick burgundy hair fell unstyled to her shoulders, framing the warmth of her face. Unlike the waifish, cookie-cutter blondes that adorned Harvard dorm room walls, this woman was healthy with an unembellished beauty and genuineness that radiated a striking personal confidence.

To Langdon's surprise, the woman walked directly up to him and extended a polite hand. "Monsieur Langdon, I am Agent Neveu from DCPJ's Cryptology Department." Her words curved richly around her muted Anglo-Franco accent. "It is a pleasure to meet you."
Langdon took her soft palm in his and felt himself momentarily fixed in her strong gaze. Her eyes were olive-green—incisive and clear.
Fache drew a seething inhalation, clearly preparing to launch into a reprimand.
"Captain," she said, turning quickly and beating him to the punch, "please excuse the interruption, but—"
"Ce n'est pas le moment!" Fache sputtered.
"I tried to phone you." Sophie continued in English, as if out of courtesy to Langdon. "But your cell phone was turned off."
"I turned it off for a reason," Fache hissed. "I am speaking to Mr. Langdon."
"I've deciphered the numeric code," she said flatly.
Langdon felt a pulse of excitement. She broke the code?
Fache looked uncertain how to respond.
"Before I explain," Sophie said, "I have an urgent message for Mr. Langdon."
Fache's expression turned to one of deepening concern. "For Mr. Langdon?"
She nodded, turning back to Langdon. "You need to contact the U.S. Embassy, Mr. Langdon. They have a message for you from the States."
Langdon reacted with surprise, his excitement over the code giving way to a sudden ripple of concern. A message from the States? He tried to imagine who could be trying to reach him. Only a few of his colleagues knew he was in Paris.
Fache's broad jaw had tightened with the news. "The U.S. Embassy?" he demanded, sounding suspicious. "How would they know to find Mr. Langdon here?"
Sophie shrugged. "Apparently they called Mr. Langdon's hotel, and the concierge told them Mr. Langdon had been collected by a DCPJ agent."
Fache looked troubled. "And the embassy contacted DCPJ Cryptography?"

"No, sir," Sophie said, her voice firm. "When I called the DCPJ switchboard in an attempt to contact you, they had a message waiting for Mr. Langdon and asked me to pass it along if I got through to you."
Fache's brow furrowed in apparent confusion. He opened his mouth to speak, but Sophie had already turned back to Langdon.
"Mr. Langdon," she declared, pulling a small slip of paper from her pocket, "this is the number for your embassy's messaging service. They asked that you phone in as soon as possible." She handed him the paper with an intent gaze. "While I explain the code to Captain Fache, you need to make this call."
Langdon studied the slip. It had a Paris phone number and extension on it. "Thank you," he said, feeling worried now. "Where do I find a phone?"
Sophie began to pull a cell phone from her sweater pocket, but Fache waved her off. He now looked like Mount Vesuvius about to erupt. Without taking his eyes off Sophie, he produced his own cell phone and held it out. "This line is secure, Mr. Langdon. You may use it."
Langdon felt mystified by Fache's anger with the young woman. Feeling uneasy, he accepted the captain's phone. Fache immediately marched Sophie several steps away and began chastising her in hushed tones. Disliking the captain more and more, Langdon turned away from the odd confrontation and switched on the cell phone. Checking the slip of paper Sophie had given him, Langdon dialed the number.
The line began to ring.
One ring... two rings... three rings...
Finally the call connected.
Langdon expected to hear an embassy operator, but he found himself instead listening to an answering machine. Oddly, the voice on the tape was familiar. It was that of Sophie Neveu.
"Bonjour, vous êtes bien chez Sophie Neveu," the woman's voice said. "Je suis absenle pour le moment, mais..."
Confused, Langdon turned back toward Sophie. "I'm sorry, Ms. Neveu? I think you may have given me—"
"No, that's the right number," Sophie interjected quickly, as if anticipating Langdon's confusion. "The embassy has an automated message system. You have to dial an access code to pick up your 

messages."
Langdon stared. "But—"
"It's the three-digit code on the paper I gave you."
Langdon opened his mouth to explain the bizarre error, but Sophie flashed him a silencing glare that lasted only an instant. Her green eyes sent a crystal-clear message.
Don't ask questions. Just do it.
Bewildered, Langdon punched in the extension on the slip of paper: 454.
Sophie's outgoing message immediately cut off, and Langdon heard an electronic voice announce in French: "You have one new message." Apparently, 454 was Sophie's remote access code for picking up her messages while away from home.
I'm picking up this woman's messages?
Langdon could hear the tape rewinding now. Finally, it stopped, and the machine engaged. Langdon listened as the message began to play. Again, the voice on the line was Sophie's.
"Mr. Langdon," the message began in a fearful whisper. "Do not react to this message. Just listen calmly. You are in danger right now. Follow my directions very closely." 
CHAPTER 10
Silas sat behind the wheel of the black Audi the Teacher had arranged for him and gazed out at the great Church of Saint-Sulpice. Lit from beneath by banks of floodlights, the church's two bell towers rose like stalwart sentinels above the building's long body. On either flank, a shadowy row of sleek buttresses jutted out like the ribs of a beautiful beast.
The heathens used a house of God to conceal their keystone. Again the brotherhood had confirmed their legendary reputation for illusion and deceit. Silas was looking forward to finding the keystone and giving it to the Teacher so they could recover what the brotherhood had long ago stolen from the faithful.
How powerful that will make Opus Dei.
Parking the Audi on the deserted Place Saint-Sulpice, Silas exhaled, telling himself to clear his mind for the task at hand. His broad back still ached from the corporal mortification he had 

endured earlier today, and yet the pain was inconsequential compared with the anguish of his life before Opus Dei had saved him.
Still, the memories haunted his soul.
Release your hatred, Silas commanded himself. Forgive those who trespassed against you.
Looking up at the stone towers of Saint-Sulpice, Silas fought that familiar undertow... that force that often dragged his mind back in time, locking him once again in the prison that had been his world as a young man. The memories of purgatory came as they always did, like a tempest to his senses... the reek of rotting cabbage, the stench of death, human urine and feces. The cries of hopelessness against the howling wind of the Pyrenees and the soft sobs of forgotten men.
Andorra, he thought, feeling his muscles tighten.
Incredibly, it was in that barren and forsaken suzerain between Spain and France, shivering in his stone cell, wanting only to die, that Silas had been saved.
He had not realized it at the time.
The light came long after the thunder.
His name was not Silas then, although he didn't recall the name his parents had given him. He had left home when he was seven. His drunken father, a burly dockworker, enraged by the arrival of an albino son, beat his mother regularly, blaming her for the boy's embarrassing condition. When the boy tried to defend her, he too was badly beaten.
One night, there was a horrific fight, and his mother never got up. The boy stood over his lifeless mother and felt an unbearable up-welling of guilt for permitting it to happen.
This is my fault!
As if some kind of demon were controlling his body, the boy walked to the kitchen and grasped a butcher knife. Hypnotically, he moved to the bedroom where his father lay on the bed in a drunken stupor. Without a word, the boy stabbed him in the back. His father cried out in pain and tried to roll over, but his son stabbed him again, over and over until the apartment fell quiet.
The boy fled home but found the streets of Marseilles equally unfriendly. His strange appearance made him an outcast among the other young runaways, and he was forced to live alone in the basement of a dilapidated factory, eating stolen fruit and raw fish from the dock. His only companions were tattered magazines he found in the trash, and he taught himself to read them. Over time, he grew strong. When he was twelve, another drifter—a girl twice his age—mocked him on the streets and attempted to steal his food. The girl found herself pummeled to within 

inches of her life. When the authorities pulled the boy off her, they gave him an ultimatum—leave Marseilles or go to juvenile prison.
The boy moved down the coast to Toulon. Over time, the looks of pity on the streets turned to looks of fear. The boy had grown to a powerful young man. When people passed by, he could hear them whispering to one another. A ghost, they would say, their eyes wide with fright as they stared at his white skin. A ghost with the eyes of a devil!
And he felt like a ghost... transparent... floating from seaport to seaport.
People seemed to look right through him.
At eighteen, in a port town, while attempting to steal a case of cured ham from a cargo ship, he was caught by a pair of crewmen. The two sailors who began to beat him smelled of beer, just as his father had. The memories of fear and hatred surfaced like a monster from the deep. The young man broke the first sailor's neck with his bare hands, and only the arrival of the police saved the second sailor from a similar fate.
Two months later, in shackles, he arrived at a prison in Andorra.
You are as white as a ghost, the inmates ridiculed as the guards marched him in, naked and cold. Mira el espectro! Perhaps the ghost will pass right through these walls!
Over the course of twelve years, his flesh and soul withered until he knew he had become transparent.
I am a ghost.
I am weightless.
Yo soy un espectro... palido coma una fantasma... caminando este mundo a solas.
One night the ghost awoke to the screams of other inmates. He didn't know what invisible force was shaking the floor on which he slept, nor what mighty hand was trembling the mortar of his stone cell, but as he jumped to his feet, a large boulder toppled onto the very spot where he had been sleeping. Looking up to see where the stone had come from, he saw a hole in the trembling wall, and beyond it, a vision he had not seen in over ten years. The moon.
Even while the earth still shook, the ghost found himself scrambling through a narrow tunnel, staggering out into an expansive vista, and tumbling down a barren mountainside into the woods. He ran all night, always downward, delirious with hunger and exhaustion.
Skirting the edges of consciousness, he found himself at dawn in a clearing where train tracks cut a 

swath across the forest. Following the rails, he moved on as if dreaming. Seeing an empty freight car, he crawled in for shelter and rest. When he awoke the train was moving. How long? How far? A pain was growing in his gut. Am I dying? He slept again. This time he awoke to someone yelling, beating him, throwing him out of the freight car. Bloody, he wandered the outskirts of a small village looking in vain for food. Finally, his body too weak to take another step, he lay down by the side of the road and slipped into unconsciousness.
The light came slowly, and the ghost wondered how long he had been dead. A day? Three days? It didn't matter. His bed was soft like a cloud, and the air around him smelled sweet with candles. Jesus was there, staring down at him. I am here, Jesus said. The stone has been rolled aside, and you are born again.
He slept and awoke. Fog shrouded his thoughts. He had never believed in heaven, and yet Jesus was watching over him. Food appeared beside his bed, and the ghost ate it, almost able to feel the flesh materializing on his bones. He slept again. When he awoke, Jesus was still smiling down, speaking. You are saved, my son. Blessed are those who follow my path.
Again, he slept.
It was a scream of anguish that startled the ghost from his slumber. His body leapt out of bed, staggered down a hallway toward the sounds of shouting. He entered into a kitchen and saw a large man beating a smaller man. Without knowing why, the ghost grabbed the large man and hurled him backward against a wall. The man fled, leaving the ghost standing over the body of a young man in priest's robes. The priest had a badly shattered nose. Lifting the bloody priest, the ghost carried him to a couch.
"Thank you, my friend," the priest said in awkward French. "The offertory money is tempting for thieves. You speak French in your sleep. Do you also speak Spanish?"
The ghost shook his head.
"What is your name?" he continued in broken French.
The ghost could not remember the name his parents had given him. All he heard were the taunting gibes of the prison guards.
The priest smiled. "No hay problema. My name is Manuel Aringarosa. I am a missionary from Madrid. I was sent here to build a church for the Obra de Dios."
"Where am I?" His voice sounded hollow.
"Oviedo. In the north of Spain."

"How did I get here?"
"Someone left you on my doorstep. You were ill. I fed you. You've been here many days."
The ghost studied his young caretaker. Years had passed since anyone had shown any kindness. "Thank you, Father."
The priest touched his bloody lip. "It is I who am thankful, my friend."
When the ghost awoke in the morning, his world felt clearer. He gazed up at the crucifix on the wall above his bed. Although it no longer spoke to him, he felt a comforting aura in its presence. Sitting up, he was surprised to find a newspaper clipping on his bedside table. The article was in French, a week old. When he read the story, he filled with fear. It told of an earthquake in the mountains that had destroyed a prison and freed many dangerous criminals.
His heart began pounding. The priest knows who I am! The emotion he felt was one he had not felt for some time. Shame. Guilt. It was accompanied by the fear of being caught. He jumped from his bed. Where do I run?
"The Book of Acts," a voice said from the door.
The ghost turned, frightened.
The young priest was smiling as he entered. His nose was awkwardly bandaged, and he was holding out an old Bible. "I found one in French for you. The chapter is marked."
Uncertain, the ghost took the Bible and looked at the chapter the priest had marked.
Acts 16.
The verses told of a prisoner named Silas who lay naked and beaten in his cell, singing hymns to God. When the ghost reached Verse 26, he gasped in shock.
"...And suddenly, there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken, and all the doors fell open."
His eyes shot up at the priest.
The priest smiled warmly. "From now on, my friend, if you have no other name, I shall call you Silas."
The ghost nodded blankly. Silas. He had been given flesh. My name is Silas.

"It's time for breakfast," the priest said. "You will need your strength if you are to help me build this church." 
Twenty thousand feet above the Mediterranean, Alitalia flight 1618 bounced in turbulence, causing passengers to shift nervously. Bishop Aringarosa barely noticed. His thoughts were with the future of Opus Dei. Eager to know how plans in Paris were progressing, he wished he could phone Silas. But he could not. The Teacher had seen to that.
"It is for your own safety," the Teacher had explained, speaking in English with a French accent. "I am familiar enough with electronic communications to know they can be intercepted. The results could be disastrous for you."
Aringarosa knew he was right. The Teacher seemed an exceptionally careful man. He had not revealed his own identity to Aringarosa, and yet he had proven himself a man well worth obeying. After all, he had somehow obtained very secret information. The names of the brotherhood's four top members! This had been one of the coups that convinced the bishop the Teacher was truly capable of delivering the astonishing prize he claimed he could unearth.
"Bishop," the Teacher had told him, "I have made all the arrangements. For my plan to succeed, you must allow Silas to answer only to me for several days. The two of you will not speak. I will communicate with him through secure channels."
"You will treat him with respect?"
"A man of faith deserves the highest."
"Excellent. Then I understand. Silas and I shall not speak until this is over."
"I do this to protect your identity, Silas's identity, and my investment."
"Your investment?"
"Bishop, if your own eagerness to keep abreast of progress puts you in jail, then you will be unable to pay me my fee."
The bishop smiled. "A fine point. Our desires are in accord. Godspeed."
Twenty million euro, the bishop thought, now gazing out the plane's window. The sum was approximately the same number of U.S. dollars. A pittance for something so powerful.
He felt a renewed confidence that the Teacher and Silas would not fail. Money and faith were 

powerful motivators. 
CHAPTER 11
"Une plaisanterie numérique?" Bezu Fache was livid, glaring at Sophie Neveu in disbelief. A numeric joke? "Your professional assessment of Saunière's code is that it is some kind of mathematical prank?"
Fache was in utter incomprehension of this woman's gall. Not only had she just barged in on Fache without permission, but she was now trying to convince him that Saunière, in his final moments of life, had been inspired to leave a mathematical gag?
"This code," Sophie explained in rapid French, "is simplistic to the point of absurdity. Jacques Saunière must have known we would see through it immediately." She pulled a scrap of paper from her sweater pocket and handed it to Fache. "Here is the decryption."
Fache looked at the card.
1-1-2-3-5-8-13-21 
"This is it?" he snapped. "All you did was put the numbers in increasing order!"
Sophie actually had the nerve to give a satisfied smile. "Exactly."
Fache's tone lowered to a guttural rumble. "Agent Neveu, I have no idea where the hell you're going with this, but I suggest you get there fast." He shot an anxious glance at Langdon, who stood nearby with the phone pressed to his ear, apparently still listening to his phone message from the U.S. Embassy. From Langdon's ashen expression, Fache sensed the news was bad.
"Captain," Sophie said, her tone dangerously defiant, "the sequence of numbers you have in your hand happens to be one of the most famous mathematical progressions in history."
Fache was not aware there even existed a mathematical progression that qualified as famous, and he certainly didn't appreciate Sophie's off-handed tone.
"This is the Fibonacci sequence," she declared, nodding toward the piece of paper in Fache's hand. "A progression in which each term is equal to the sum of the two preceding terms."
Fache studied the numbers. Each term was indeed the sum of the two previous, and yet Fache could not imagine what the relevance of all this was to Saunière's death.

"Mathematician Leonardo Fibonacci created this succession of numbers in the thirteenth-century. Obviously there can be no coincidence that all of the numbers Saunière wrote on the floor belong to Fibonacci's famous sequence."
Fache stared at the young woman for several moments. "Fine, if there is no coincidence, would you tell me why Jacques Saunière chose to do this. What is he saying? What does this mean?"
She shrugged. "Absolutely nothing. That's the point. It's a simplistic cryptographic joke. Like taking the words of a famous poem and shuffling them at random to see if anyone recognizes what all the words have in common."
Fache took a menacing step forward, placing his face only inches from Sophie's. "I certainly hope you have a much more satisfying explanation than that."
Sophie's soft features grew surprisingly stern as she leaned in. "Captain, considering what you have at stake here tonight, I thought you might appreciate knowing that Jacques Saunière might be playing games with you. Apparently not. I'll inform the director of Cryptography you no longer need our services."
With that, she turned on her heel, and marched off the way she had come.
Stunned, Fache watched her disappear into the darkness. Is she out of her mind? Sophie Neveu had just redefined le suicide professionnel.
Fache turned to Langdon, who was still on the phone, looking more concerned than before, listening intently to his phone message. The U.S. Embassy. Bezu Fache despised many things... but few drew more wrath than the U.S. Embassy.
Fache and the ambassador locked horns regularly over shared affairs of state—their most common battleground being law enforcement for visiting Americans. Almost daily, DCPJ arrested American exchange students in possession of drugs, U.S. businessmen for soliciting underage Prostitutes, American tourists for shoplifting or destruction of property. Legally, the U.S. Embassy could intervene and extradite guilty citizens back to the United States, where they received nothing more than a slap on the wrist.
And the embassy invariably did just that.
L'émasculation de la Police Judiciaire, Fache called it. Paris Match had run a cartoon recently depicting Fache as a police dog, trying to bite an American criminal, but unable to reach because it was chained to the U.S. Embassy.
Not tonight, Fache told himself. There is far too much at stake.

By the time Robert Langdon hung up the phone, he looked ill.
"Is everything all right?" Fache asked.
Weakly, Langdon shook his head.
Bad news from home, Fache sensed, noticing Langdon was sweating slightly as Fache took back his cell phone.
"An accident," Langdon stammered, looking at Fache with a strange expression. "A friend..." He hesitated. "I'll need to fly home first thing in the morning."
Fache had no doubt the shock on Langdon's face was genuine, and yet he sensed another emotion there too, as if a distant fear were suddenly simmering in the American's eyes. "I'm sorry to hear that," Fache said, watching Langdon closely. "Would you like to sit down?" He motioned toward one of the viewing benches in the gallery.
Langdon nodded absently and took a few steps toward the bench. He paused, looking more confused with every moment. "Actually, I think I'd like to use the rest room."
Fache frowned inwardly at the delay. "The rest room. Of course. Let's take a break for a few minutes." He motioned back down the long hallway in the direction they had come from. "The rest rooms are back toward the curator's office."
Langdon hesitated, pointing in the other direction toward the far end of the Grand Gallery corridor. "I believe there's a much closer rest room at the end."
Fache realized Langdon was right. They were two thirds of the way down, and the Grand Gallery dead-ended at a pair of rest rooms. "Shall I accompany you?"
Langdon shook his head, already moving deeper into the gallery. "Not necessary. I think I'd like a few minutes alone."
Fache was not wild about the idea of Langdon wandering alone down the remaining length of corridor, but he took comfort in knowing the Grand Gallery was a dead end whose only exit was at the other end—the gate under which they had entered. Although French fire regulations required several emergency stairwells for a space this large, those stairwells had been sealed automatically when Saunière tripped the security system. Granted, that system had now been reset, unlocking the stairwells, but it didn't matter—the external doors, if opened, would set off fire alarms and were guarded outside by DCPJ agents. Langdon could not possibly leave without Fache knowing about it.

"I need to return to Mr. Saunière's office for a moment," Fache said. "Please come find me directly, Mr. Langdon. There is more we need to discuss."
Langdon gave a quiet wave as he disappeared into the darkness.
Turning, Fache marched angrily in the opposite direction. Arriving at the gate, he slid under, exited the Grand Gallery, marched down the hall, and stormed into the command center at Saunière's office.
"Who gave the approval to let Sophie Neveu into this building!" Fache bellowed.
Collet was the first to answer. "She told the guards outside she'd broken the code."
Fache looked around. "Is she gone?"
"She's not with you?"
"She left." Fache glanced out at the darkened hallway. Apparently Sophie had been in no mood to stop by and chat with the other officers on her way out.
For a moment, Fache considered radioing the guards in the entresol and telling them to stop Sophie and drag her back up here before she could leave the premises. He thought better of it. That was only his pride talking... wanting the last word. He'd had enough distractions tonight.
Deal with Agent Neveu later, he told himself, already looking forward to firing her.
Pushing Sophie from his mind, Fache stared for a moment at the miniature knight standing on Saunière's desk. Then he turned back to Collet. "Do you have him?"
Collet gave a curt nod and spun the laptop toward Fache. The red dot was clearly visible on the floor plan overlay, blinking methodically in a room marked TOILETTES PUBLIQUES.
"Good," Fache said, lighting a cigarette and stalking into the hall. I've got a phone call to make. Be damned sure the rest room is the only place Langdon goes." 
CHAPTER 12
Robert Langdon felt light-headed as he trudged toward the end of the Grand Gallery. Sophie's phone message played over and over in his mind. At the end of the corridor, illuminated signs bearing the international stick-figure symbols for rest rooms guided him through a maze-like series of dividers displaying Italian drawings and hiding the rest rooms from sight.

Finding the men's room door, Langdon entered and turned on the lights.
The room was empty.
Walking to the sink, he splashed cold water on his face and tried to wake up. Harsh fluorescent lights glared off the stark tile, and the room smelled of ammonia. As he toweled off, the rest room's door creaked open behind him. He spun.
Sophie Neveu entered, her green eyes flashing fear. "Thank God you came. We don't have much time."
Langdon stood beside the sinks, staring in bewilderment at DCPJ cryptographer Sophie Neveu. Only minutes ago, Langdon had listened to her phone message, thinking the newly arrived cryptographer must be insane. And yet, the more he listened, the more he sensed Sophie Neveu was speaking in earnest. Do not react to this message. Just listen calmly. You are in danger right now. Follow my directions very closely. Filled with uncertainty, Langdon had decided to do exactly as Sophie advised. He told Fache that the phone message was regarding an injured friend back home. Then he had asked to use the rest room at the end of the Grand Gallery.
Sophie stood before him now, still catching her breath after doubling back to the rest room. In the fluorescent lights, Langdon was surprised to see that her strong air actually radiated from unexpectedly soft features. Only her gaze was sharp, and the juxtaposition conjured images of a multilayered Renoir portrait... veiled but distinct, with a boldness that somehow retained its shroud of mystery.
"I wanted to warn you, Mr. Langdon..." Sophie began, still catching her breath, "that you are sous surveillance cachée. Under a guarded observation." As she spoke, her accented English resonated off the tile walls, giving her voice a hollow quality.
"But... why?" Langdon demanded. Sophie had already given him an explanation on the phone, but he wanted to hear it from her lips.
"Because," she said, stepping toward him, "Fache's primary suspect in this murder is you."
Langdon was braced for the words, and yet they still sounded utterly ridiculous. According to Sophie, Langdon had been called to the Louvre tonight not as a symbologist but rather as a suspect and was currently the unwitting target of one of DCPJ's favorite interrogation methods—surveillance cachée—a deft deception in which the police calmly invited a suspect to a crime scene and interviewed him in hopes he would get nervous and mistakenly incriminate himself.
"Look in your jacket's left pocket," Sophie said. "You'll find proof they are watching you."

Langdon felt his apprehension rising. Look in my pocket? It sounded like some kind of cheap magic trick.
"Just look."
Bewildered, Langdon reached his hand into his tweed jacket's left pocket—one he never used. Feeling around inside, he found nothing. What the devil did you expect? He began wondering if Sophie might just be insane after all. Then his fingers brushed something unexpected. Small and hard. Pinching the tiny object between his fingers, Langdon pulled it out and stared in astonishment. It was a metallic, button-shaped disk, about the size of a watch battery. He had never seen it before. "What the...?"
"GPS tracking dot," Sophie said. "Continuously transmits its location to a Global Positioning System satellite that DCPJ can monitor. We use them to monitor people's locations. It's accurate within two feet anywhere on the globe. They have you on an electronic leash. The agent who picked you up at the hotel slipped it inside your pocket before you left your room."
Langdon flashed back to the hotel room... his quick shower, getting dressed, the DCPJ agent politely holding out Langdon's tweed coat as they left the room. It's cool outside, Mr. Langdon, the agent had said. Spring in Paris is not all your song boasts. Langdon had thanked him and donned the jacket.
Sophie's olive gaze was keen. "I didn't tell you about the tracking dot earlier because I didn't want you checking your pocket in front of Fache. He can't know you've found it."
Langdon had no idea how to respond.
"They tagged you with GPS because they thought you might run." She paused. "In fact, they hoped you would run; it would make their case stronger."
"Why would I run!" Langdon demanded. "I'm innocent!"
"Fache feels otherwise."
Angrily, Langdon stalked toward the trash receptacle to dispose of the tracking dot.
"No!" Sophie grabbed his arm and stopped him. "Leave it in your pocket. If you throw it out, the signal will stop moving, and they'll know you found the dot. The only reason Fache left you alone is because he can monitor where you are. If he thinks you've discovered what he's doing..." Sophie did not finish the thought. Instead, she pried the metallic disk from Langdon's hand and slid it back into the pocket of his tweed coat. "The dot stays with you. At least for the moment."

Langdon felt lost. "How the hell could Fache actually believe I killed Jacques Saunière!"
"He has some fairly persuasive reasons to suspect you." Sophie's expression was grim. "There is a piece of evidence here that you have not yet seen. Fache has kept it carefully hidden from you."
Langdon could only stare.
"Do you recall the three lines of text that Saunière wrote on the floor?"
Langdon nodded. The numbers and words were imprinted on Langdon's mind.
Sophie's voice dropped to a whisper now. "Unfortunately, what you saw was not the entire message. There was a fourth line that Fache photographed and then wiped clean before you arrived."
Although Langdon knew the soluble ink of a watermark stylus could easily be wiped away, he could not imagine why Fache would erase evidence.
"The last line of the message," Sophie said, "was something Fache did not want you to know about." She paused. "At least not until he was done with you."
Sophie produced a computer printout of a photo from her sweater pocket and began unfolding it. "Fache uploaded images of the crime scene to the Cryptology Department earlier tonight in hopes we could figure out what Saunière's message was trying to say. This is a photo of the complete message." She handed the page to Langdon.
Bewildered, Langdon looked at the image. The close-up photo revealed the glowing message on the parquet floor. The final line hit Langdon like a kick in the gut.
13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5
O, Draconian devil!
Oh, lame saint!
P.S. Find Robert Langdon 
CHAPTER 13
For several seconds, Langdon stared in wonder at the photograph of Saunière's postscript. P.S. Find Robert Langdon. He felt as if the floor were tilting beneath his feet. Saunière left a postscript with my name on it? In his wildest dreams, Langdon could not fathom why.

"Now do you understand," Sophie said, her eyes urgent, "why Fache ordered you here tonight, and why you are his primary suspect?"
The only thing Langdon understood at the moment was why Fache had looked so smug when Langdon suggested Saunière would have accused his killer by name.
Find Robert Langdon.
"Why would Saunière write this?" Langdon demanded, his confusion now giving way to anger. "Why would I want to kill Jacques Saunière?"
"Fache has yet to uncover a motive, but he has been recording his entire conversation with you tonight in hopes you might reveal one."
Langdon opened his mouth, but still no words came.
"He's fitted with a miniature microphone," Sophie explained. "It's connected to a transmitter in his pocket that radios the signal back to the command post."
"This is impossible," Langdon stammered. "I have an alibi. I went directly back to my hotel after my lecture. You can ask the hotel desk."
"Fache already did. His report shows you retrieving your room key from the concierge at about ten-thirty. Unfortunately, the time of the murder was closer to eleven. You easily could have left your hotel room unseen."
"This is insanity! Fache has no evidence!"
Sophie's eyes widened as if to say: No evidence? "Mr. Langdon, your name is written on the floor beside the body, and Saunière's date book says you were with him at approximately the time of the murder." She paused. "Fache has more than enough evidence to take you into custody for questioning."
Langdon suddenly sensed that he needed a lawyer. "I didn't do this."
Sophie sighed. "This is not American television, Mr. Langdon. In France, the laws protect the police, not criminals. Unfortunately, in this case, there is also the media consideration. Jacques Saunière was a very prominent and well-loved figure in Paris, and his murder will be news in the morning. Fache will be under immediate pressure to make a statement, and he looks a lot better having a suspect in custody already. Whether or not you are guilty, you most certainly will be held by DCPJ until they can figure out what really happened."
Langdon felt like a caged animal. "Why are you telling me all this?"

"Because, Mr. Langdon, I believe you are innocent." Sophie looked away for a moment and then back into his eyes. "And also because it is partially my fault that you're in trouble."
"I'm sorry? It's your fault Saunière is trying to frame me?"
"Saunière wasn't trying to frame you. It was a mistake. That message on the floor was meant for me."
Langdon needed a minute to process that one. "I beg your pardon?"
"That message wasn't for the police. He wrote it for me. I think he was forced to do everything in such a hurry that he just didn't realize how it would look to the police." She paused. "The numbered code is meaningless. Saunière wrote it to make sure the investigation included cryptographers, ensuring that I would know as soon as possible what had happened to him."
Langdon felt himself losing touch fast. Whether or not Sophie Neveu had lost her mind was at this point up for grabs, but at least Langdon now understood why she was trying to help him. P.S. Find Robert Langdon. She apparently believed the curator had left her a cryptic postscript telling her to find Langdon. "But why do you think his message was for you?"
"The Vitruvian Man," she said flatly. "That particular sketch has always been my favorite Da Vinci work. Tonight he used it to catch my attention."
"Hold on. You're saying the curator knew your favorite piece of art?" She nodded. "I'm sorry. This is all coming out of order. Jacques Saunière and I..."
Sophie's voice caught, and Langdon heard a sudden melancholy there, a painful past, simmering just below the surface. Sophie and Jacques Saunière apparently had some kind of special relationship. Langdon studied the beautiful young woman before him, well aware that aging men in France often took young mistresses. Even so, Sophie Neveu as a "kept woman" somehow didn't seem to fit.
"We had a falling-out ten years ago," Sophie said, her voice a whisper now. "We've barely spoken since. Tonight, when Crypto got the call that he had been murdered, and I saw the images of his body and text on the floor, I realized he was trying to send me a message."
"Because of The Vitruvian Man?"
"Yes. And the letters P.S."
"Post Script?"

She shook her head. "P.S. are my initials."
"But your name is Sophie Neveu."
She looked away. "P.S. is the nickname he called me when I lived with him." She blushed. "It stood for Princesse Sophie"
Langdon had no response.
"Silly, I know," she said. "But it was years ago. When I was a little girl."
"You knew him when you were a little girl?"
"Quite well," she said, her eyes welling now with emotion. "Jacques Saunière was my grandfather." 
CHAPTER 14
"Where's Langdon?" Fache demanded, exhaling the last of a cigarette as he paced back into the command post.
"Still in the men's room, sir." Lieutenant Collet had been expecting the question.
Fache grumbled, "Taking his time, I see."
The captain eyed the GPS dot over Collet's shoulder, and Collet could almost hear the wheels turning. Fache was fighting the urge to go check on Langdon. Ideally, the subject of an observation was allowed the most time and freedom possible, lulling him into a false sense of security. Langdon needed to return of his own volition. Still, it had been almost ten minutes.
Too long.
"Any chance Langdon is onto us?" Fache asked.
Collet shook his head. "We're still seeing small movements inside the men's room, so the GPS dot is obviously still on him. Perhaps he feels ill? If he had found the dot, he would have removed it and tried to run."
Fache checked his watch. "Fine."
Still Fache seemed preoccupied. All evening, Collet had sensed an atypical intensity in his captain. 

Usually detached and cool under pressure, Fache tonight seemed emotionally engaged, as if this were somehow a personal matter for him.
Not surprising, Collet thought. Fache needs this arrest desperately. Recently the Board of Ministers and the media had become more openly critical of Fache's aggressive tactics, his clashes with powerful foreign embassies, and his gross overbudgeting on new technologies. Tonight, a high-tech, high-profile arrest of an American would go a long way to silence Fache's critics, helping him secure the job a few more years until he could retire with the lucrative pension. God knows he needs the pension, Collet thought. Fache's zeal for technology had hurt him both professionally and personally. Fache was rumored to have invested his entire savings in the technology craze a few years back and lost his shirt. And Fache is a man who wears only the finest shirts.
Tonight, there was still plenty of time. Sophie Neveu's odd interruption, though unfortunate, had been only a minor wrinkle. She was gone now, and Fache still had cards to play. He had yet to inform Langdon that his name had been scrawled on the floor by the victim. P.S. Find Robert Langdon. The American's reaction to that little bit of evidence would be telling indeed.
"Captain?" one of the DCPJ agents now called from across the office. "I think you better take this call." He was holding out a telephone receiver, looking concerned.
"Who is it?" Fache said.
The agent frowned. "It's the director of our Cryptology Department."
"And?"
"It's about Sophie Neveu, sir. Something is not quite right." 
CHAPTER 15
It was time.
Silas felt strong as he stepped from the black Audi, the nighttime breeze rustling his loose-fitting robe. The winds of change are in the air. He knew the task before him would require more finesse than force, and he left his handgun in the car. The thirteen-round Heckler Koch USP 40 had been provided by the Teacher.
A weapon of death has no place in a house of God.

The plaza before the great church was deserted at this hour, the only visible souls on the far side of Place Saint-Sulpice a couple of teenage hookers showing their wares to the late night tourist traffic. Their nubile bodies sent a familiar longing to Silas's loins. His thigh flexed instinctively, causing the barbed cilice belt to cut painfully into his flesh.
The lust evaporated instantly. For ten years now, Silas had faithfully denied himself all sexual indulgence, even self-administered. It was The Way. He knew he had sacrificed much to follow Opus Dei, but he had received much more in return. A vow of celibacy and the relinquishment of all personal assets hardly seemed a sacrifice. Considering the poverty from which he had come and the sexual horrors he had endured in prison, celibacy was a welcome change.
Now, having returned to France for the first time since being arrested and shipped to prison in Andorra, Silas could feel his homeland testing him, dragging violent memories from his redeemed soul. You have been reborn, he reminded himself. His service to God today had required the sin of murder, and it was a sacrifice Silas knew he would have to hold silently in his heart for all eternity.
The measure of your faith is the measure of the pain you can endure, the Teacher had told him. Silas was no stranger to pain and felt eager to prove himself to the Teacher, the one who had assured him his actions were ordained by a higher power.
"Hago la obra de Dios," Silas whispered, moving now toward the church entrance.
Pausing in the shadow of the massive doorway, he took a deep breath. It was not until this instant that he truly realized what he was about to do, and what awaited him inside.
The keystone. It will lead us to our final goal.
He raised his ghost-white fist and banged three times on the door.
Moments later, the bolts of the enormous wooden portal began to move. 
CHAPTER 16
Sophie wondered how long it would take Fache to figure out she had not left the building. Seeing that Langdon was clearly overwhelmed, Sophie questioned whether she had done the right thing by cornering him here in the men's room.
What else was I supposed to do?
She pictured her grandfather's body, naked and spread-eagle on the floor. There was a time when he had meant the world to her, yet tonight, Sophie was surprised to feel almost no sadness for the 

man. Jacques Saunière was a stranger to her now. Their relationship had evaporated in a single instant one March night when she was twenty-two. Ten years ago. Sophie had come home a few days early from graduate university in England and mistakenly witnessed her grandfather engaged in something Sophie was obviously not supposed to see. It was an image she barely could believe to this day.
If I hadn't seen it with my own eyes...
Too ashamed and stunned to endure her grandfather's pained attempts to explain, Sophie immediately moved out on her own, taking money she had saved, and getting a small flat with some roommates. She vowed never to speak to anyone about what she had seen. Her grandfather tried desperately to reach her, sending cards and letters, begging Sophie to meet him so he could explain. Explain how!? Sophie never responded except once—to forbid him ever to call her or try to meet her in public. She was afraid his explanation would be more terrifying than the incident itself.
Incredibly, Saunière had never given up on her, and Sophie now possessed a decade's worth of correspondence unopened in a dresser drawer. To her grandfather's credit, he had never once disobeyed her request and phoned her.
Until this afternoon.
"Sophie?" His voice had sounded startlingly old on her answering machine. "I have abided by your wishes for so long... and it pains me to call, but I must speak to you. Something terrible has happened."
Standing in the kitchen of her Paris flat, Sophie felt a chill to hear him again after all these years. His gentle voice brought back a flood of fond childhood memories.
"Sophie, please listen." He was speaking English to her, as he always did when she was a little girl. Practice French at school. Practice English at home. "You cannot be mad forever. Have you not read the letters that I've sent all these years? Do you not yet understand?" He paused. "We must speak at once. Please grant your grandfather this one wish. Call me at the Louvre. Right away. I believe you and I are in grave danger." Sophie stared at the answering machine. Danger? What was he talking about?
"Princess..." Her grandfather's voice cracked with an emotion Sophie could not place. "I know I've kept things from you, and I know it has cost me your love. But it was for your own safety. Now you must know the truth. Please, I must tell you the truth about your family."
Sophie suddenly could hear her own heart. My family? Sophie's parents had died when she was only four. Their car went off a bridge into fast-moving water. Her grandmother and younger brother had also been in the car, and Sophie's entire family had been erased in an instant. She had a 

box of newspaper clippings to confirm it.
His words had sent an unexpected surge of longing through her bones. My family! In that fleeting instant, Sophie saw images from the dream that had awoken her countless times when she was a little girl: My family is alive! They are coming home! But, as in her dream, the pictures evaporated into oblivion.
Your family is dead, Sophie. They are not coming home.
"Sophie..." her grandfather said on the machine. "I have been waiting for years to tell you. Waiting for the right moment, but now time has run out. Call me at the Louvre. As soon as you get this. I'll wait here all night. I fear we both may be in danger. There's so much you need to know."
The message ended.
In the silence, Sophie stood trembling for what felt like minutes. As she considered her grandfather's message, only one possibility made sense, and his true intent dawned.
It was bait.
Obviously, her grandfather wanted desperately to see her. He was trying anything. Her disgust for the man deepened. Sophie wondered if maybe he had fallen terminally ill and had decided to attempt any ploy he could think of to get Sophie to visit him one last time. If so, he had chosen wisely.
My family.
Now, standing in the darkness of the Louvre men's room, Sophie could hear the echoes of this afternoon's phone message. Sophie, we both may be in danger. Call me.
She had not called him. Nor had she planned to. Now, however, her skepticism had been deeply challenged. Her grandfather lay murdered inside his own museum. And he had written a code on the floor.
A code for her. Of this, she was certain.
Despite not understanding the meaning of his message, Sophie was certain its cryptic nature was additional proof that the words were intended for her. Sophie's passion and aptitude for cryptography were a product of growing up with Jacques Saunière—a fanatic himself for codes, word games, and puzzles. How many Sundays did we spend doing the cryptograms and crosswords in the newspaper?
At the age of twelve, Sophie could finish the Le Monde crossword without any help, and her 

grandfather graduated her to crosswords in English, mathematical puzzles, and substitution ciphers. Sophie devoured them all. Eventually she turned her passion into a profession by becoming a codebreaker for the Judicial Police.
Tonight, the cryptographer in Sophie was forced to respect the efficiency with which her grandfather had used a simple code to unite two total strangers—Sophie Neveu and Robert Langdon.
The question was why?
Unfortunately, from the bewildered look in Langdon's eyes, Sophie sensed the American had no more idea than she did why her grandfather had thrown them together.
She pressed again. "You and my grandfather had planned to meet tonight. What about?"
Langdon looked truly perplexed. "His secretary set the meeting and didn't offer any specific reason, and I didn't ask. I assumed he'd heard I would be lecturing on the pagan iconography of French cathedrals, was interested in the topic, and thought it would be fun to meet for drinks after the talk."
Sophie didn't buy it. The connection was flimsy. Her grandfather knew more about pagan iconography than anyone else on earth. Moreover, he an exceptionally private man, not someone prone to chatting with random American professors unless there were an important reason.
Sophie took a deep breath and probed further. "My grandfather called me this afternoon and told me he and I were in grave danger. Does that mean anything to you?"
Langdon's blue eyes now clouded with concern. "No, but considering what just happened..."
Sophie nodded. Considering tonight's events, she would be a fool not to be frightened. Feeling drained, she walked to the small plate-glass window at the far end of the bathroom and gazed out in silence through the mesh of alarm tape embedded in the glass. They were high up—forty feet at least.
Sighing, she raised her eyes and gazed out at Paris's dazzling landscape. On her left, across the Seine, the illuminated Eiffel Tower. Straight ahead, the Arc de Triomphe. And to the right, high atop the sloping rise of Montmartre, the graceful arabesque dome of Sacré-Coeur, its polished stone glowing white like a resplendent sanctuary.
Here at the westernmost tip of the Denon Wing, the north-south thoroughfare of Place du Carrousel ran almost flush with the building with only a narrow sidewalk separating it from the Louvre's outer wall. Far below, the usual caravan of the city's nighttime delivery trucks sat idling, waiting for the signals to change, their running lights seeming to twinkle mockingly up at Sophie.

"I don't know what to say," Langdon said, coming up behind her. "Your grandfather is obviously trying to tell us something. I'm sorry I'm so little help."
Sophie turned from the window, sensing a sincere regret in Langdon's deep voice. Even with all the trouble around him, he obviously wanted to help her. The teacher in him, she thought, having read DCPJ's workup on their suspect. This was an academic who clearly despised not understanding.
We have that in common, she thought.
As a codebreaker, Sophie made her living extracting meaning from seemingly senseless data. Tonight, her best guess was that Robert Langdon, whether he knew it or not, possessed information that she desperately needed. Princesse Sophie, Find Robert Langdon. How much clearer could her grandfather's message be? Sophie needed more time with Langdon. Time to think. Time to sort out this mystery together. Unfortunately, time was running out.
Gazing up at Langdon, Sophie made the only play she could think of. "Bezu Fache will be taking you into custody at any minute. I can get you out of this museum. But we need to act now."
Langdon's eyes went wide. "You want me to run?"
"It's the smartest thing you could do. If you let Fache take you into custody now, you'll spend weeks in a French jail while DCPJ and the U.S. Embassy fight over which courts try your case. But if we get you out of here, and make it to your embassy, then your government will protect your rights while you and I prove you had nothing to do with this murder."
Langdon looked not even vaguely convinced. "Forget it! Fache has armed guards on every single exit! Even if we escape without being shot, running away only makes me look guilty. You need to tell Fache that the message on the floor was for you, and that my name is not there as an accusation."
"I will do that," Sophie said, speaking hurriedly, "but after you're safely inside the U.S. Embassy. It's only about a mile from here, and my car is parked just outside the museum. Dealing with Fache from here is too much of a gamble. Don't you see? Fache has made it his mission tonight to prove you are guilty. The only reason he postponed your arrest was to run this observance in hopes you did something that made his case stronger."
"Exactly. Like running!"
The cell phone in Sophie's sweater pocket suddenly began ringing. Fache probably. She reached in her sweater and turned off the phone.
"Mr. Langdon," she said hurriedly, "I need to ask you one last question." And your entire future may depend on it. "The writing on the floor is obviously not proof of your guilt, and yet Fache told 

our team he is certain you are his man. Can you think of any other reason he might be convinced you're guilty?"
Langdon was silent for several seconds. "None whatsoever."
Sophie sighed. Which means Fache is lying. Why, Sophie could not begin to imagine, but that was hardly the issue at this point. The fact remained that Bezu Fache was determined to put Robert Langdon behind bars tonight, at any cost. Sophie needed Langdon for herself, and it was this dilemma that left Sophie only one logical conclusion.
I need to get Langdon to the U.S. Embassy.
Turning toward the window, Sophie gazed through the alarm mesh embedded in the plate glass, down the dizzying forty feet to the pavement below. A leap from this height would leave Langdon with a couple of broken legs. At best.
Nonetheless, Sophie made her decision.
Robert Langdon was about to escape the Louvre, whether he wanted to or not. 
CHAPTER 17
"What do you mean she's not answering?" Fache looked incredulous. "You're calling her cell phone, right? I know she's carrying it."
Collet had been trying to reach Sophie now for several minutes. "Maybe her batteries are dead. Or her ringer's off."
Fache had looked distressed ever since talking to the director of Cryptology on the phone. After hanging up, he had marched over to Collet and demanded he get Agent Neveu on the line. Now Collet had failed, and Fache was pacing like a caged lion.
"Why did Crypto call?" Collet now ventured.
Fache turned. "To tell us they found no references to Draconian devils and lame saints."
"That's all?"
"No, also to tell us that they had just identified the numerics as Fibonacci numbers, but they suspected the series was meaningless."

Collet was confused. "But they already sent Agent Neveu to tell us that."
Fache shook his head. "They didn't send Neveu."
"What?"
"According to the director, at my orders he paged his entire team to look at the images I'd wired him. When Agent Neveu arrived, she took one look at the photos of Saunière and the code and left the office without a word. The director said he didn't question her behavior because she was understandably upset by the photos."
"Upset? She's never seen a picture of a dead body?"
Fache was silent a moment. "I was not aware of this, and it seems neither was the director until a coworker informed him, but apparently Sophie Neveu is Jacques Saunière's granddaughter."
Collet was speechless.
"The director said she never once mentioned Saunière to him, and he assumed it was because she probably didn't want preferential treatment for having a famous grandfather."
No wonder she was upset by the pictures. Collet could barely conceive of the unfortunate coincidence that called in a young woman to decipher a code written by a dead family member. Still, her actions made no sense. "But she obviously recognized the numbers as Fibonacci numbers because she came here and told us. I don't understand why she would leave the office without telling anyone she had figured it out."
Collet could think of only one scenario to explain the troubling developments: Saunière had written a numeric code on the floor in hopes Fache would involve cryptographers in the investigation, and therefore involve his own granddaughter. As for the rest of the message, was Saunière communicating in some way with his granddaughter? If so, what did the message tell her? And how did Langdon fit in?
Before Collet could ponder it any further, the silence of the deserted museum was shattered by an alarm. The bell sounded like it was coming from inside the Grand Gallery.
"Alarme!" one of the agents yelled, eyeing his feed from the Louvre security center. "Grande Galerie! Toilettes Messieurs!"
Fache wheeled to Collet. "Where's Langdon?"
"Still in the men's room!" Collet pointed to the blinking red dot on his laptop schematic. "He must have broken the window!" Collet knew Langdon wouldn't get far. Although Paris fire codes 

required windows above fifteen meters in public buildings be breakable in case of fire, exiting a Louvre second-story window without the help of a hook and ladder would be suicide. Furthermore, there were no trees or grass on the western end of the Denon Wing to cushion a fall. Directly beneath that rest room window, the two-lane Place du Carrousel ran within a few feet of the outer wall. "My God," Collet exclaimed, eyeing the screen. "Langdon's moving to the window ledge!"
But Fache was already in motion. Yanking his Manurhin MR-93 revolver from his shoulder holster, the captain dashed out of the office.
Collet watched the screen in bewilderment as the blinking dot arrived at the window ledge and then did something utterly unexpected. The dot moved outside the perimeter of the building.
What's going on? he wondered. Is Langdon out on a ledge or—
"Jesu!" Collet jumped to his feet as the dot shot farther outside the wall. The signal seemed to shudder for a moment, and then the blinking dot came to an abrupt stop about ten yards outside the perimeter of the building.
Fumbling with the controls, Collet called up a Paris street map and recalibrated the GPS. Zooming in, he could now see the exact location of the signal.
It was no longer moving.
It lay at a dead stop in the middle of Place du Carrousel.
Langdon had jumped. 
CHAPTER 18
Fache sprinted down the Grand Gallery as Collet's radio blared over the distant sound of the alarm.
"He jumped!" Collet was yelling. "I'm showing the signal out on Place du Carrousel! Outside the bathroom window! And it's not moving at all! Jesus, I think Langdon has just committed suicide!"
Fache heard the words, but they made no sense. He kept running. The hallway seemed never-ending. As he sprinted past Saunière's body, he set his sights on the partitions at the far end of the Denon Wing. The alarm was getting louder now.
"Wait!" Collet's voice blared again over the radio. "He's moving! My God, he's alive. Langdon's moving!"

Fache kept running, cursing the length of the hallway with every step.
"Langdon's moving faster!" Collet was still yelling on the radio. "He's running down Carrousel. Wait... he's picking up speed. He's moving too fast!"
Arriving at the partitions, Fache snaked his way through them, saw the rest room door, and ran for it.
The walkie-talkie was barely audible now over the alarm. "He must be in a car! I think he's in a car! I can't—"
Collet's words were swallowed by the alarm as Fache finally burst into the men's room with his gun drawn. Wincing against the piercing shrill, he scanned the area.
The stalls were empty. The bathroom deserted. Fache's eyes moved immediately to the shattered window at the far end of the room. He ran to the opening and looked over the edge. Langdon was nowhere to be seen. Fache could not imagine anyone risking a stunt like this. Certainly if he had dropped that far, he would be badly injured.
The alarm cut off finally, and Collet's voice became audible again over the walkie-talkie.
"...moving south... faster... crossing the Seine on Pont du Carrousel!"
Fache turned to his left. The only vehicle on Pont du Carrousel was an enormous twin-bed Trailor delivery truck moving southward away from the Louvre. The truck's open-air bed was covered with a vinyl tarp, roughly resembling a giant hammock. Fache felt a shiver of apprehension. That truck, only moments ago, had probably been stopped at a red light directly beneath the rest room window.
An insane risk, Fache told himself. Langdon had no way of knowing what the truck was carrying beneath that tarp. What if the truck were carrying steel? Or cement? Or even garbage? A forty-foot leap? It was madness.
"The dot is turning!" Collet called. "He's turning right on Pont des Saints-Peres!"
Sure enough, the Trailor truck that had crossed the bridge was slowing down and making a right turn onto Pont des Saints-Peres. So be it, Fache thought. Amazed, he watched the truck disappear around the corner. Collet was already radioing the agents outside, pulling them off the Louvre perimeter and sending them to their patrol cars in pursuit, all the while broadcasting the truck's changing location like some kind of bizarre play-by-play.
It's over, Fache knew. His men would have the truck surrounded within minutes. Langdon was not going anywhere.

Stowing his weapon, Fache exited the rest room and radioed Collet. "Bring my car around. I want to be there when we make the arrest."
As Fache jogged back down the length of the Grand Gallery, he wondered if Langdon had even survived the fall.
Not that it mattered.
Langdon ran. Guilty as charged. 
Only fifteen yards from the rest room, Langdon and Sophie stood in the darkness of the Grand Gallery, their backs pressed to one of the large partitions that hid the bathrooms from the gallery. They had barely managed to hide themselves before Fache had darted past them, gun drawn, and disappeared into the bathroom.
The last sixty seconds had been a blur.
Langdon had been standing inside the men's room refusing to run from a crime he didn't commit, when Sophie began eyeing the plate-glass window and examining the alarm mesh running through it. Then she peered downward into the street, as if measuring the drop.
"With a little aim, you can get out of here," she said.
Aim? Uneasy, he peered out the rest room window.
Up the street, an enormous twin-bed eighteen-wheeler was headed for the stoplight beneath the window. Stretched across the truck's massive cargo bay was a blue vinyl tarp, loosely covering the truck's load. Langdon hoped Sophie was not thinking what she seemed to be thinking.
"Sophie, there's no way I'm jump—"
"Take out the tracking dot."
Bewildered, Langdon fumbled in his pocket until he found the tiny metallic disk. Sophie took it from him and strode immediately to the sink. She grabbed a thick bar of soap, placed the tracking dot on top of it, and used her thumb to push the disk down hard into the bar. As the disk sank into the soft surface, she pinched the hole closed, firmly embedding the device in the bar.
Handing the bar to Langdon, Sophie retrieved a heavy, cylindrical trash can from under the sinks. Before Langdon could protest, Sophie ran at the window, holding the can before her like a 

battering ram. Driving the bottom of the trash can into the center of the window, she shattered the glass.
Alarms erupted overhead at earsplitting decibel levels.
"Give me the soap!" Sophie yelled, barely audible over the alarm.
Langdon thrust the bar into her hand.
Palming the soap, she peered out the shattered window at the eighteen-wheeler idling below. The target was plenty big—an expansive, stationary tarp—and it was less than ten feet from the side of the building. As the traffic lights prepared to change, Sophie took a deep breath and lobbed the bar of soap out into the night.
The soap plummeted downward toward the truck, landing on the edge of the tarp, and sliding downward into the cargo bay just as the traffic light turned green.
"Congratulations," Sophie said, dragging him toward the door. "You just escaped from the Louvre."
Fleeing the men's room, they moved into the shadows just as Fache rushed past. 
Now, with the fire alarm silenced, Langdon could hear the sounds of DCPJ sirens tearing away from the Louvre. A police exodus. Fache had hurried off as well, leaving the Grand Gallery deserted.
"There's an emergency stairwell about fifty meters back into the Grand Gallery," Sophie said. "Now that the guards are leaving the perimeter, we can get out of here."
Langdon decided not to say another word all evening. Sophie Neveu was clearly a hell of a lot smarter than he was. 
CHAPTER 19
The Church of Saint-Sulpice, it is said, has the most eccentric history of any building in Paris. Built over the ruins of an ancient temple to the Egyptian goddess Isis, the church possesses an architectural footprint matching that of Notre Dame to within inches. The sanctuary has played host to the baptisms of the Marquis de Sade and Baudelaire, as well as the marriage of Victor Hugo. The attached seminary has a well-documented history of unorthodoxy and was once the 

clandestine meeting hall for numerous secret societies.
Tonight, the cavernous nave of Saint-Sulpice was as silent as a tomb, the only hint of life the faint smell of incense from mass earlier that evening. Silas sensed an uneasiness in Sister Sandrine's demeanor as she led him into the sanctuary. He was not surprised by this. Silas was accustomed to people being uncomfortable with his appearance.
"You're an American," she said.
"French by birth," Silas responded. "I had my calling in Spain, and I now study in the United States."
Sister Sandrine nodded. She was a small woman with quiet eyes. "And you have never seen Saint-Sulpice?"
"I realize this is almost a sin in itself."
"She is more beautiful by day."
"I am certain. Nonetheless, I am grateful that you would provide me this opportunity tonight."
"The abbé requested it. You obviously have powerful friends."
You have no idea, Silas thought.
As he followed Sister Sandrine down the main aisle, Silas was surprised by the austerity of the sanctuary. Unlike Notre Dame with its colorful frescoes, gilded altar-work, and warm wood, Saint-Sulpice was stark and cold, conveying an almost barren quality reminiscent of the ascetic cathedrals of Spain. The lack of decor made the interior look even more expansive, and as Silas gazed up into the soaring ribbed vault of the ceiling, he imagined he was standing beneath the hull of an enormous overturned ship.
A fitting image, he thought. The brotherhood's ship was about to be capsized forever. Feeling eager to get to work, Silas wished Sister Sandrine would leave him. She was a small woman whom Silas could incapacitate easily, but he had vowed not to use force unless absolutely necessary. She is a woman of the cloth, and it is not her fault the brotherhood chose her church as a hiding place for their keystone. She should not be punished for the sins of others.
"I am embarrassed, Sister, that you were awoken on my behalf."
"Not at all. You are in Paris a short time. You should not miss Saint-Sulpice. Are your interests in the church more architectural or historical?"

"Actually, Sister, my interests are spiritual."
She gave a pleasant laugh. "That goes without saying. I simply wondered where to begin your tour."
Silas felt his eyes focus on the altar. "A tour is unnecessary. You have been more than kind. I can show myself around."
"It is no trouble," she said. "After all, I am awake."
Silas stopped walking. They had reached the front pew now, and the altar was only fifteen yards away. He turned his massive body fully toward the small woman, and he could sense her recoil as she gazed up into his red eyes. "If it does not seem too rude, Sister, I am not accustomed to simply walking into a house of God and taking a tour. Would you mind if I took some time alone to pray before I look around?"
Sister Sandrine hesitated. "Oh, of course. I shall wait in the rear of the church for you."
Silas put a soft but heavy hand on her shoulder and peered down. "Sister, I feel guilty already for having awoken you. To ask you to stay awake is too much. Please, you should return to bed. I can enjoy your sanctuary and then let myself out."
She looked uneasy. "Are you sure you won't feel abandoned?"
"Not at all. Prayer is a solitary joy."
"As you wish."
Silas took his hand from her shoulder. "Sleep well, Sister. May the peace of the Lord be with you."
"And also with you." Sister Sandrine headed for the stairs. "Please be sure the door closes tightly on your way out."
"I will be sure of it." Silas watched her climb out of sight. Then he turned and knelt in the front pew, feeling the cilice cut into his leg.
Dear God, I offer up to you this work I do today.... 
Crouching in the shadows of the choir balcony high above the altar, Sister Sandrine peered silently through the balustrade at the cloaked monk kneeling alone. The sudden dread in her soul made it hard to stay still. For a fleeting instant, she wondered if this mysterious visitor could be the enemy 

they had warned her about, and if tonight she would have to carry out the orders she had been holding all these years. She decided to stay there in the darkness and watch his every move. 
CHAPTER 20
Emerging from the shadows, Langdon and Sophie moved stealthily up the deserted Grand Gallery corridor toward the emergency exit stairwell.
As he moved, Langdon felt like he was trying to assemble a jigsaw puzzle in the dark. The newest aspect of this mystery was a deeply troubling one: The captain of the Judicial Police is trying to frame me for murder
"Do you think," he whispered, "that maybe Fache wrote that message on the floor?"
Sophie didn't even turn. "Impossible."
Langdon wasn't so sure. "He seems pretty intent on making me look guilty. Maybe he thought writing my name on the floor would help his case?"
"The Fibonacci sequence? The P.S.? All the Da Vinci and goddess symbolism? That had to be my grandfather."
Langdon knew she was right. The symbolism of the clues meshed too perfectly—the pentacle, The Vitruvian Man, Da Vinci, the goddess, and even the Fibonacci sequence. A coherent symbolic set, as iconographers would call it. All inextricably tied.
"And his phone call to me this afternoon," Sophie added. "He said he had to tell me something. I'm certain his message at the Louvre was his final effort to tell me something important, something he thought you could help me understand."
Langdon frowned. O, Draconian devil! Oh, lame saint.! He wished he could comprehend the message, both for Sophie's well-being and for his own. Things had definitely gotten worse since he first laid eyes on the cryptic words. His fake leap out the bathroom window was not going to help Langdon's popularity with Fache one bit. Somehow he doubted the captain of the French police would see the humor in chasing down and arresting a bar of soap.
"The doorway isn't much farther," Sophie said.
"Do you think there's a possibility that the numbers in your grandfather's message hold the key to understanding the other lines?" Langdon had once worked on a series of Baconian manuscripts that contained epigraphical ciphers in which certain lines of code were clues as to how to decipher the 

other lines.
"I've been thinking about the numbers all night. Sums, quotients, products. I don't see anything. Mathematically, they're arranged at random. Cryptographic gibberish."
"And yet they're all part of the Fibonacci sequence. That can't be coincidence."
"It's not. Using Fibonacci numbers was my grandfather's way of waving another flag at me—like writing the message in English, or arranging himself like my favorite piece of art, or drawing a pentacle on himself. All of it was to catch my attention."
"The pentacle has meaning to you?"
"Yes. I didn't get a chance to tell you, but the pentacle was a special symbol between my grandfather and me when I was growing up. We used to play Tarot cards for fun, and my indicator card always turned out to be from the suit of pentacles. I'm sure he stacked the deck, but pentacles got to be our little joke."
Langdon felt a chill. They played Tarot? The medieval Italian card game was so replete with hidden heretical symbolism that Langdon had dedicated an entire chapter in his new manuscript to the Tarot. The game's twenty-two cards bore names like The Female Pope, The Empress, and The Star. Originally, Tarot had been devised as a secret means to pass along ideologies banned by the Church. Now, Tarot's mystical qualities were passed on by modern fortune-tellers.
The Tarot indicator suit for feminine divinity is pentacles, Langdon thought, realizing that if Saunière had been stacking his granddaughter's deck for fun, pentacles was an apropos inside joke.
They arrived at the emergency stairwell, and Sophie carefully pulled open the door. No alarm sounded. Only the doors to the outside were wired. Sophie led Langdon down a tight set of switchback stairs toward the ground level, picking up speed as they went.
"Your grandfather," Langdon said, hurrying behind her, "when he told you about the pentacle, did he mention goddess worship or any resentment of the Catholic Church?"
Sophie shook her head. "I was more interested in the mathematics of it—the Divine Proportion, PHI, Fibonacci sequences, that sort of thing."
Langdon was surprised. "Your grandfather taught you about the number PHI?"
"Of course. The Divine Proportion." Her expression turned sheepish. "In fact, he used to joke that I was half divine... you know, because of the letters in my name."
Langdon considered it a moment and then groaned.

s-o-PHI-e.
Still descending, Langdon refocused on PHI. He was starting to realize that Saunière's clues were even more consistent than he had first imagined.
Da Vinci... Fibonacci numbers... the pentacle.
Incredibly, all of these things were connected by a single concept so fundamental to art history that Langdon often spent several class periods on the topic.
PHI.
He felt himself suddenly reeling back to Harvard, standing in front of his "Symbolism in Art" class, writing his favorite number on the chalkboard.
1.618
Langdon turned to face his sea of eager students. "Who can tell me what this number is?"
A long-legged math major in back raised his hand. "That's the number PHI." He pronounced it fee.
"Nice job, Stettner," Langdon said. "Everyone, meet PHI."
"Not to be confused with PI," Stettner added, grinning. "As we mathematicians like to say: PHI is one H of a lot cooler than PI!"
Langdon laughed, but nobody else seemed to get the joke.
Stettner slumped.
"This number PHI," Langdon continued, "one-point-six-one-eight, is a very important number in art. Who can tell me why?"
Stettner tried to redeem himself. "Because it's so pretty?"
Everyone laughed.
"Actually," Langdon said, "Stettner's right again. PHI is generally considered the most beautiful number in the universe."
The laughter abruptly stopped, and Stettner gloated.

As Langdon loaded his slide projector, he explained that the number PHI was derived from the Fibonacci sequence—a progression famous not only because the sum of adjacent terms equaled the next term, but because the quotients of adjacent terms possessed the astonishing property of approaching the number 1.618—PHI!
Despite PHI's seemingly mystical mathematical origins, Langdon explained, the truly mind-boggling aspect of PHI was its role as a fundamental building block in nature. Plants, animals, and even human beings all possessed dimensional properties that adhered with eerie exactitude to the ratio of PHI to 1.
"PHI's ubiquity in nature," Langdon said, killing the lights, "clearly exceeds coincidence, and so the ancients assumed the number PHI must have been preordained by the Creator of the universe. Early scientists heralded one-point-six-one-eight as the Divine Proportion."
"Hold on," said a young woman in the front row. "I'm a bio major and I've never seen this Divine Proportion in nature."
"No?" Langdon grinned. "Ever study the relationship between females and males in a honeybee community?"
"Sure. The female bees always outnumber the male bees."
"Correct. And did you know that if you divide the number of female bees by the number of male bees in any beehive in the world, you always get the same number?"
"You do?"
"Yup. PHI."
The girl gaped. "NO WAY!"
"Way!" Langdon fired back, smiling as he projected a slide of a spiral seashell. "Recognize this?"
"It's a nautilus," the bio major said. "A cephalopod mollusk that pumps gas into its chambered shell to adjust its buoyancy."
"Correct. And can you guess what the ratio is of each spiral's diameter to the next?"
The girl looked uncertain as she eyed the concentric arcs of the nautilus spiral.
Langdon nodded. "PHI. The Divine Proportion. One-point-six-one-eight to one."
The girl looked amazed.

Langdon advanced to the next slide—a close-up of a sunflower's seed head. "Sunflower seeds grow in opposing spirals. Can you guess the ratio of each rotation's diameter to the next?"
"PHI?" everyone said.
"Bingo." Langdon began racing through slides now—spiraled pinecone petals, leaf arrangement on plant stalks, insect segmentation—all displaying astonishing obedience to the Divine Proportion.
"This is amazing!" someone cried out.
"Yeah," someone else said, "but what does it have to do with art?"
"Aha!" Langdon said. "Glad you asked." He pulled up another slide—a pale yellow parchment displaying Leonardo da Vinci's famous male nude—The Vitruvian Man—named for Marcus Vitruvius, the brilliant Roman architect who praised the Divine Proportion in his text De Architectura.
"Nobody understood better than Da Vinci the divine structure of the human body. Da Vinci actually exhumed corpses to measure the exact proportions of human bone structure. He was the first to show that the human body is literally made of building blocks whose proportional ratios always equal PHI."
Everyone in class gave him a dubious look.
"Don't believe me?" Langdon challenged. "Next time you're in the shower, take a tape measure."
A couple of football players snickered.
"Not just you insecure jocks," Langdon prompted. "All of you. Guys and girls. Try it. Measure the distance from the tip of your head to the floor. Then divide that by the distance from your belly button to the floor. Guess what number you get."
"Not PHI!" one of the jocks blurted out in disbelief.
"Yes, PHI," Langdon replied. "One-point-six-one-eight. Want another example? Measure the distance from your shoulder to your fingertips, and then divide it by the distance from your elbow to your fingertips. PHI again. Another? Hip to floor divided by knee to floor. PHI again. Finger joints. Toes. Spinal divisions. PHI. PHI. PHI. My friends, each of you is a walking tribute to the Divine Proportion."
Even in the darkness, Langdon could see they were all astounded. He felt a familiar warmth inside. This is why he taught. "My friends, as you can see, the chaos of the world has an underlying order. When the ancients discovered PHI, they were certain they had stumbled across God's building 

block for the world, and they worshipped Nature because of that. And one can understand why. God's hand is evident in Nature, and even to this day there exist pagan, Mother Earth-revering religions. Many of us celebrate nature the way the pagans did, and don't even know it. May Day is a perfect example, the celebration of spring... the earth coming back to life to produce her bounty. The mysterious magic inherent in the Divine Proportion was written at the beginning of time. Man is simply playing by Nature's rules, and because art is man's attempt to imitate the beauty of the Creator's hand, you can imagine we might be seeing a lot of instances of the Divine Proportion in art this semester."
Over the next half hour, Langdon showed them slides of artwork by Michelangelo, Albrecht Dürer, Da Vinci, and many others, demonstrating each artist's intentional and rigorous adherence to the Divine Proportion in the layout of his compositions. Langdon unveiled PHI in the architectural dimensions of the Greek Parthenon, the pyramids of Egypt, and even the United Nations Building in New York. PHI appeared in the organizational structures of Mozart's sonatas, Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, as well as the works of Bartók, Debussy, and Schubert. The number PHI, Langdon told them, was even used by Stradivarius to calculate the exact placement of the f-holes in the construction of his famous violins.
"In closing," Langdon said, walking to the chalkboard, "we return to symbols" He drew five intersecting lines that formed a five-pointed star. "This symbol is one of the most powerful images you will see this term. Formally known as a pentagram—or pentacle, as the ancients called it—this symbol is considered both divine and magical by many cultures. Can anyone tell me why that might be?"
Stettner, the math major, raised his hand. "Because if you draw a pentagram, the lines automatically divide themselves into segments according to the Divine Proportion."
Langdon gave the kid a proud nod. "Nice job. Yes, the ratios of line segments in a pentacle all equal PHI, making this symbol the ultimate expression of the Divine Proportion. For this reason, the five-pointed star has always been the symbol for beauty and perfection associated with the goddess and the sacred feminine."
The girls in class beamed.
"One note, folks. We've only touched on Da Vinci today, but we'll be seeing a lot more of him this semester. Leonardo was a well-documented devotee of the ancient ways of the goddess. Tomorrow, I'll show you his fresco The Last Supper, which is one of the most astonishing tributes to the sacred feminine you will ever see."
"You're kidding, right?" somebody said. "I thought The Last Supper was about Jesus!"
Langdon winked. "There are symbols hidden in places you would never imagine."

"Come on," Sophie whispered. "What's wrong? We're almost there. Hurry!"
Langdon glanced up, feeling himself return from faraway thoughts. He realized he was standing at a dead stop on the stairs, paralyzed by sudden revelation.
O, Draconian devil! Oh, lame saint!
Sophie was looking back at him.
It can't be that simple, Langdon thought.
But he knew of course that it was.
There in the bowels of the Louvre... with images of PHI and Da Vinci swirling through his mind, Robert Langdon suddenly and unexpectedly deciphered Saunière's code.
"O, Draconian devil!" he said. "Oh, lame saint! It's the simplest kind of code!" 
Sophie was stopped on the stairs below him, staring up in confusion. A code? She had been pondering the words all night and had not seen a code. Especially a simple one.
"You said it yourself." Langdon's voice reverberated with excitement. "Fibonacci numbers only have meaning in their proper order. Otherwise they're mathematical gibberish."
Sophie had no idea what he was talking about. The Fibonacci numbers? She was certain they had been intended as nothing more than a means to get the Cryptography Department involved tonight. They have another purpose? She plunged her hand into her pocket and pulled out the printout, studying her grandfather's message again.
13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5
O, Draconian devil!
Oh, lame saint! 
What about the numbers?
"The scrambled Fibonacci sequence is a clue," Langdon said, taking the printout. "The numbers are a hint as to how to decipher the rest of the message. He wrote the sequence out of order to tell us to apply the same concept to the text. O, Draconian devil? Oh, lame saint? Those lines mean nothing. 

They are simply letters written out of order."
Sophie needed only an instant to process Langdon's implication, and it seemed laughably simple. "You think this message is... une anagramme?" She stared at him. "Like a word jumble from a newspaper?"
Langdon could see the skepticism on Sophie's face and certainly understood. Few people realized that anagrams, despite being a trite modern amusement, had a rich history of sacred symbolism.
The mystical teachings of the Kabbala drew heavily on anagrams—rearranging the letters of Hebrew words to derive new meanings. French kings throughout the Renaissance were so convinced that anagrams held magic power that they appointed royal anagrammatists to help them make better decisions by analyzing words in important documents. The Romans actually referred to the study of anagrams as ars magna—"the great art."
Langdon looked up at Sophie, locking eyes with her now. "Your grandfather's meaning was right in front of us all along, and he left us more than enough clues to see it."
Without another word, Langdon pulled a pen from his jacket pocket and rearranged the letters in each line.
O, Draconian devil! Oh, lame saint!
was a perfect anagram of...
Leonardo da Vinci! The Mona Lisa! 
CHAPTER 21
The Mona Lisa.
For an instant, standing in the exit stairwell, Sophie forgot all about trying to leave the Louvre.
Her shock over the anagram was matched only by her embarrassment at not having deciphered the message herself. Sophie's expertise in complex cryptanalysis had caused her to overlook simplistic word games, and yet she knew she should have seen it. After all, she was no stranger to anagrams—especially in English.
When she was young, often her grandfather would use anagram games to hone her English spelling. Once he had written the English word "planets" and told Sophie that an astonishing sixty-two other English words of varying lengths could be formed using those same letters. Sophie had 

spent three days with an English dictionary until she found them all.
"I can't imagine," Langdon said, staring at the printout, "how your grandfather created such an intricate anagram in the minutes before he died."
Sophie knew the explanation, and the realization made her feel even worse. I should have seen this! She now recalled that her grandfather—a wordplay aficionado and art lover—had entertained himself as a young man by creating anagrams of famous works of art. In fact, one of his anagrams had gotten him in trouble once when Sophie was a little girl. While being interviewed by an American art magazine, Saunière had expressed his distaste for the modernist Cubist movement by noting that Picasso's masterpiece Les Demoiselles d'Avignon was a perfect anagram of vile meaningless doodles. Picasso fans were not amused.
"My grandfather probably created this Mona Lisa anagram long ago," Sophie said, glancing up at Langdon. And tonight he was forced to use it as a makeshift code. Her grandfather's voice had called out from beyond with chilling precision.
Leonardo da Vinci!
The Mona Lisa!
Why his final words to her referenced the famous painting, Sophie had no idea, but she could think of only one possibility. A disturbing one.
Those were not his final words....
Was she supposed to visit the Mona Lisa? Had her grandfather left her a message there? The idea seemed perfectly plausible. After all, the famous painting hung in the Salle des Etats—a private viewing chamber accessible only from the Grand Gallery. In fact, Sophie now realized, the doors that opened into the chamber were situated only twenty meters from where her grandfather had been found dead.
He easily could have visited the Mona Lisa before he died.
Sophie gazed back up the emergency stairwell and felt torn. She knew she should usher Langdon from the museum immediately, and yet instinct urged her to the contrary. As Sophie recalled her first childhood visit to the Denon Wing, she realized that if her grandfather had a secret to tell her, few places on earth made a more apt rendezvous than Da Vinci's Mona Lisa. 
"She's just a little bit farther," her grandfather had whispered, clutching Sophie's tiny hand as he led her through the deserted museum after hours.

Sophie was six years old. She felt small and insignificant as she gazed up at the enormous ceilings and down at the dizzying floor. The empty museum frightened her, although she was not about to let her grandfather know that. She set her jaw firmly and let go of his hand.
"Up ahead is the Salle des Etats," her grandfather said as they approached the Louvre's most famous room. Despite her grandfather's obvious excitement, Sophie wanted to go home. She had seen pictures of the Mona Lisa in books and didn't like it at all. She couldn't understand why everyone made such a fuss.
"C'est ennuyeux," Sophie grumbled.
"Boring," he corrected. "French at school. English at home."
"Le Louvre, c'est pas chez moi!" she challenged.
He gave her a tired laugh. "Right you are. Then let's speak English just for fun."
Sophie pouted and kept walking. As they entered the Salle des Etats, her eyes scanned the narrow room and settled on the obvious spot of honor—the center of the right-hand wall, where a lone portrait hung behind a protective Plexiglas wall. Her grandfather paused in the doorway and motioned toward the painting.
"Go ahead, Sophie. Not many people get a chance to visit her alone."
Swallowing her apprehension, Sophie moved slowly across the room. After everything she'd heard about the Mona Lisa, she felt as if she were approaching royalty. Arriving in front of the protective Plexiglas, Sophie held her breath and looked up, taking it in all at once.
Sophie was not sure what she had expected to feel, but it most certainly was not this. No jolt of amazement. No instant of wonder. The famous face looked as it did in books. She stood in silence for what felt like forever, waiting for something to happen.
"So what do you think?" her grandfather whispered, arriving behind her. "Beautiful, yes?"
"She's too little."
Saunière smiled. "You're little and you're beautiful."
I am not beautiful, she thought. Sophie hated her red hair and freckles, and she was bigger than all the boys in her class. She looked back at the Mona Lisa and shook her head. "She's even worse than in the books. Her face is... brumeux."

"Foggy," her grandfather tutored.
"Foggy," Sophie repeated, knowing the conversation would not continue until she repeated her new vocabulary word.
"That's called the sfumato style of painting," he told her, "and it's very hard to do. Leonardo da Vinci was better at it than anyone."
Sophie still didn't like the painting. "She looks like she knows something... like when kids at school have a secret."
Her grandfather laughed. "That's part of why she is so famous. People like to guess why she is smiling."
"Do you know why she's smiling?"
"Maybe." Her grandfather winked. "Someday I'll tell you all about it."
Sophie stamped her foot. "I told you I don't like secrets!"
"Princess," he smiled. "Life is filled with secrets. You can't learn them all at once." 
"I'm going back up," Sophie declared, her voice hollow in the stairwell.
"To the Mona Lisa?" Langdon recoiled. "Now?"
Sophie considered the risk. "I'm not a murder suspect. I'll take my chances. I need to understand what my grandfather was trying to tell me."
"What about the embassy?"
Sophie felt guilty turning Langdon into a fugitive only to abandon him, but she saw no other option. She pointed down the stairs to a metal door. "Go through that door, and follow the illuminated exit signs. My grandfather used to bring me down here. The signs will lead you to a security turnstile. It's monodirectional and opens out." She handed Langdon her car keys. "Mine is the red SmartCar in the employee lot. Directly outside this bulkhead. Do you know how to get to the embassy?"
Langdon nodded, eyeing the keys in his hand.
"Listen," Sophie said, her voice softening. "I think my grandfather may have left me a message at 

the Mona Lisa—some kind of clue as to who killed him. Or why I'm in danger." Or what happened to my family. "I have to go see."
"But if he wanted to tell you why you were in danger, why wouldn't he simply write it on the floor where he died? Why this complicated word game?"
"Whatever my grandfather was trying to tell me, I don't think he wanted anyone else to hear it. Not even the police." Clearly, her grandfather had done everything in his power to send a confidential transmission directly to her. He had written it in code, included her secret initials, and told her to find Robert Langdon—a wise command, considering the American symbologist had deciphered his code. "As strange as it may sound," Sophie said, "I think he wants me to get to the Mona Lisa before anyone else does."
"I'll come."
"No! We don't know how long the Grand Gallery will stay empty. You have to go."
Langdon seemed hesitant, as if his own academic curiosity were threatening to override sound judgment and drag him back into Fache's hands.
"Go. Now." Sophie gave him a grateful smile. "I'll see you at the embassy, Mr. Langdon."
Langdon looked displeased. "I'll meet you there on one condition," he replied, his voice stern.
She paused, startled. "What's that?"
"That you stop calling me Mr. Langdon."
Sophie detected the faint hint of a lopsided grin growing across Langdon's face, and she felt herself smile back. "Good luck, Robert." 
When Langdon reached the landing at the bottom of the stairs, the unmistakable smell of linseed oil and plaster dust assaulted his nostrils. Ahead, an illuminated SORTIE/EXIT displayed an arrow pointing down a long corridor.
Langdon stepped into the hallway.
To the right gaped a murky restoration studio out of which peered an army of statues in various states of repair. To the left, Langdon saw a suite of studios that resembled Harvard art classrooms—rows of easels, paintings, palettes, framing tools—an art assembly line.

As he moved down the hallway, Langdon wondered if at any moment he might awake with a start in his bed in Cambridge. The entire evening had felt like a bizarre dream. I'm about to dash out of the Louvre... a fugitive.
Saunière's clever anagrammatic message was still on his mind, and Langdon wondered what Sophie would find at the Mona Lisa... if anything. She had seemed certain her grandfather meant for her to visit the famous painting one more time. As plausible an interpretation as this seemed, Langdon felt haunted now by a troubling paradox.
P.S. Find Robert Langdon.
Saunière had written Langdon's name on the floor, commanding Sophie to find him. But why? Merely so Langdon could help her break an anagram?
It seemed quite unlikely.
After all, Saunière had no reason to think Langdon was especially skilled at anagrams. We've never even met. More important, Sophie had stated flat out that she should have broken the anagram on her own. It had been Sophie who spotted the Fibonacci sequence, and, no doubt, Sophie who, if given a little more time, would have deciphered the message with no help from Langdon.
Sophie was supposed to break that anagram on her own. Langdon was suddenly feeling more certain about this, and yet the conclusion left an obvious gaping lapse in the logic of Saunière's actions.
Why me? Langdon wondered, heading down the hall. Why was Saunière's dying wish that his estranged granddaughter find me? What is it that Saunière thinks I know?
With an unexpected jolt, Langdon stopped short. Eyes wide, he dug in his pocket and yanked out the computer printout. He stared at the last line of Saunière's message.
P.S. Find Robert Langdon.
He fixated on two letters.
P.S.
In that instant, Langdon felt Saunière's puzzling mix of symbolism fall into stark focus. Like a peal of thunder, a career's worth of symbology and history came crashing down around him. Everything Jacques Saunière had done tonight suddenly made perfect sense.
Langdon's thoughts raced as he tried to assemble the implications of what this all meant. Wheeling, he stared back in the direction from which he had come.

Is there time?
He knew it didn't matter.
Without hesitation, Langdon broke into a sprint back toward the stairs. 
CHAPTER 22
Kneeling in the first pew, Silas pretended to pray as he scanned the layout of the sanctuary. Saint-Sulpice, like most churches, had been built in the shape of a giant Roman cross. Its long central section—the nave—led directly to the main altar, where it was transversely intersected by a shorter section, known as the transept. The intersection of nave and transept occurred directly beneath the main cupola and was considered the heart of the church... her most sacred and mystical point.
Not tonight, Silas thought. Saint-Sulpice hides her secrets elsewhere.
Turning his head to the right, he gazed into the south transept, toward the open area of floor beyond the end of the pews, to the object his victims had described.
There it is.
Embedded in the gray granite floor, a thin polished strip of brass glistened in the stone... a golden line slanting across the church's floor. The line bore graduated markings, like a ruler. It was a gnomon, Silas had been told, a pagan astronomical device like a sundial. Tourists, scientists, historians, and pagans from around the world came to Saint-Sulpice to gaze upon this famous line.
The Rose Line.
Slowly, Silas let his eyes trace the path of the brass strip as it made its way across the floor from his right to left, slanting in front of him at an awkward angle, entirely at odds with the symmetry of the church. Slicing across the main altar itself, the line looked to Silas like a slash wound across a beautiful face. The strip cleaved the communion rail in two and then crossed the entire width of the church, finally reaching the corner of the north transept, where it arrived at the base of a most unexpected structure.
A colossal Egyptian obelisk.
Here, the glistening Rose Line took a ninety-degree vertical turn and continued directly up the face of the obelisk itself, ascending thirty-three feet to the very tip of the pyramidical apex, where it finally ceased.

The Rose Line, Silas thought. The brotherhood hid the keystone at the Rose Line.
Earlier tonight, when Silas told the Teacher that the Priory keystone was hidden inside Saint-Sulpice, the Teacher had sounded doubtful. But when Silas added that the brothers had all given him a precise location, with relation to a brass line running through Saint-Sulpice, the Teacher had gasped with revelation. "You speak of the Rose Line!"
The Teacher quickly told Silas of Saint-Sulpice's famed architectural oddity—a strip of brass that segmented the sanctuary on a perfect north-south axis. It was an ancient sundial of sorts, a vestige of the pagan temple that had once stood on this very spot. The sun's rays, shining through the oculus on the south wall, moved farther down the line every day, indicating the passage of time, from solstice to solstice.
The north-south stripe had been known as the Rose Line. For centuries, the symbol of the Rose had been associated with maps and guiding souls in the proper direction. The Compass Rose—drawn on almost every map—indicated North, East, South, and West. Originally known as the Wind Rose, it denoted the directions of the thirty-two winds, blowing from the directions of eight major winds, eight half-winds, and sixteen quarter-winds. When diagrammed inside a circle, these thirty-two points of the compass perfectly resembled a traditional thirty-two petal rose bloom. To this day, the fundamental navigational tool was still known as a Compass Rose, its northernmost direction still marked by an arrowhead... or, more commonly, the symbol of the fleur-de-lis.
On a globe, a Rose Line—also called a meridian or longitude—was any imaginary line drawn from the North Pole to the South Pole. There were, of course, an infinite number of Rose Lines because every point on the globe could have a longitude drawn through it connecting north and south poles. The question for early navigators was which of these lines would be called the Rose Line—the zero longitude—the line from which all other longitudes on earth would be measured.
Today that line was in Greenwich, England.
But it had not always been.
Long before the establishment of Greenwich as the prime meridian, the zero longitude of the entire world had passed directly through Paris, and through the Church of Saint-Sulpice. The brass marker in Saint-Sulpice was a memorial to the world's first prime meridian, and although Greenwich had stripped Paris of the honor in 1888, the original Rose Line was still visible today.
"And so the legend is true," the Teacher had told Silas. "The Priory keystone has been said to lie 'beneath the Sign of the Rose.' "
Now, still on his knees in a pew, Silas glanced around the church and listened to make sure no one was there. For a moment, he thought he heard a rustling in the choir balcony. He turned and gazed 

up for several seconds. Nothing.
I am alone.
Standing now, he faced the altar and genuflected three times. Then he turned left and followed the brass line due north toward the obelisk. 
At that moment, at Leonardo da Vinci International Airport in Rome, the jolt of tires hitting the runway startled Bishop Aringarosa from his slumber.
I drifted off, he thought, impressed he was relaxed enough to sleep.
"Benvenuto a Roma," the intercom announced.
Sitting up, Aringarosa straightened his black cassock and allowed himself a rare smile. This was one trip he had been happy to make. I have been on the defensive for too long. Tonight, however, the rules had changed. Only five months ago, Aringarosa had feared for the future of the Faith. Now, as if by the will of God, the solution had presented itself.
Divine intervention.
If all went as planned tonight in Paris, Aringarosa would soon be in possession of something that would make him the most powerful man in Christendom. 
CHAPTER 23
Sophie arrived breathless outside the large wooden doors of the Salle des Etats—the room that housed the Mona Lisa. Before entering, she gazed reluctantly farther down the hall, twenty yards or so, to the spot where her grandfather's body still lay under the spotlight.
The remorse that gripped her was powerful and sudden, a deep sadness laced with guilt. The man had reached out to her so many times over the past ten years, and yet Sophie had remained immovable—leaving his letters and packages unopened in a bottom drawer and denying his efforts to see her. He lied to me! Kept appalling secrets! What was I supposed to do? And so she had blocked him out. Completely.
Now her grandfather was dead, and he was talking to her from the grave.
The Mona Lisa.

She reached for the huge wooden doors, and pushed. The entryway yawned open. Sophie stood on the threshold a moment, scanning the large rectangular chamber beyond. It too was bathed in a soft red light. The Salle des Etats was one of this museum's rare culs-de-sac—a dead end and the only room off the middle of the Grand Gallery. This door, the chamber's sole point of entry, faced a dominating fifteen-foot Botticelli on the far wall. Beneath it, centered on the parquet floor, an immense octagonal viewing divan served as a welcome respite for thousands of visitors to rest their legs while they admired the Louvre's most valuable asset.
Even before Sophie entered, though, she knew she was missing something. A black light. She gazed down the hall at her grandfather under the lights in the distance, surrounded by electronic gear. If he had written anything in here, he almost certainly would have written it with the watermark stylus.
Taking a deep breath, Sophie hurried down to the well-lit crime scene. Unable to look at her grandfather, she focused solely on the PTS tools. Finding a small ultraviolet penlight, she slipped it in the pocket of her sweater and hurried back up the hallway toward the open doors of the Salle des Etats.
Sophie turned the corner and stepped over the threshold. Her entrance, however, was met by an unexpected sound of muffled footsteps racing toward her from inside the chamber. There's someone in here! A ghostly figure emerged suddenly from out of the reddish haze. Sophie jumped back.
"There you are!" Langdon's hoarse whisper cut the air as his silhouette slid to a stop in front of her.
Her relief was only momentary. "Robert, I told you to get out of here! If Fache—"
"Where were you?"
"I had to get the black light," she whispered, holding it up. "If my grandfather left me a message—"
"Sophie, listen." Langdon caught his breath as his blue eyes held her firmly. "The letters P.S.... do they mean anything else to you? Anything at all?"
Afraid their voices might echo down the hall, Sophie pulled him into the Salle des Etats and closed the enormous twin doors silently, sealing them inside. "I told you, the initials mean Princess Sophie."
"I know, but did you ever see them anywhere else? Did your grandfather ever use P.S. in any other way? As a monogram, or maybe on stationery or a personal item?"
The question startled her. How would Robert know that? Sophie had indeed seen the initials P.S. 

once before, in a kind of monogram. It was the day before her ninth birthday. She was secretly combing the house, searching for hidden birthday presents. Even then, she could not bear secrets kept from her. What did Grand-père get for me this year? She dug through cupboards and drawers. Did he get me the doll I wanted? Where would he hide it?
Finding nothing in the entire house, Sophie mustered the courage to sneak into her grandfather's bedroom. The room was off-limits to her, but her grandfather was downstairs asleep on the couch.
I'll just take a fast peek!
Tiptoeing across the creaky wood floor to his closet, Sophie peered on the shelves behind his clothing. Nothing. Next she looked under the bed. Still nothing. Moving to his bureau, she opened the drawers and one by one began pawing carefully through them. There must be something for me here! As she reached the bottom drawer, she still had not found any hint of a doll. Dejected, she opened the final drawer and pulled aside some black clothes she had never seen him wear. She was about to close the drawer when her eyes caught a glint of gold in the back of the drawer. It looked like a pocket watch chain, but she knew he didn't wear one. Her heart raced as she realized what it must be.
A necklace!
Sophie carefully pulled the chain from the drawer. To her surprise, on the end was a brilliant gold key. Heavy and shimmering. Spellbound, she held it up. It looked like no key she had ever seen. Most keys were flat with jagged teeth, but this one had a triangular column with little pockmarks all over it. Its large golden head was in the shape of a cross, but not a normal cross. This was an even-armed one, like a plus sign. Embossed in the middle of the cross was a strange symbol—two letters intertwined with some kind of flowery design.
"P.S.," she whispered, scowling as she read the letters. Whatever could this be?
"Sophie?" her grandfather spoke from the doorway.
Startled, she spun, dropping the key on the floor with a loud clang. She stared down at the key, afraid to look up at her grandfather's face. "I... was looking for my birthday present," she said, hanging her head, knowing she had betrayed his trust.
For what seemed like an eternity, her grandfather stood silently in the doorway. Finally, he let out a long troubled breath. "Pick up the key, Sophie."
Sophie retrieved the key.
Her grandfather walked in. "Sophie, you need to respect other people's privacy." Gently, he knelt down and took the key from her. "This key is very special. If you had lost it..."

Her grandfather's quiet voice made Sophie feel even worse. "I'm sorry, Grand-père. I really am." She paused. "I thought it was a necklace for my birthday."
He gazed at her for several seconds. "I'll say this once more, Sophie, because it's important. You need to learn to respect other people's privacy."
"Yes, Grand-père."
"We'll talk about this some other time. Right now, the garden needs to be weeded."
Sophie hurried outside to do her chores.
The next morning, Sophie received no birthday present from her grandfather. She hadn't expected one, not after what she had done. But he didn't even wish her happy birthday all day. Sadly, she trudged up to bed that night. As she climbed in, though, she found a note card lying on her pillow. On the card was written a simple riddle. Even before she solved the riddle, she was smiling. I know what this is! Her grandfather had done this for her last Christmas morning.
A treasure hunt!
Eagerly, she pored over the riddle until she solved it. The solution pointed her to another part of the house, where she found another card and another riddle. She solved this one too, racing on to the next card. Running wildly, she darted back and forth across the house, from clue to clue, until at last she found a clue that directed her back to her own bedroom. Sophie dashed up the stairs, rushed into her room, and stopped in her tracks. There in the middle of the room sat a shining red bicycle with a ribbon tied to the handlebars. Sophie shrieked with delight.
"I know you asked for a doll," her grandfather said, smiling in the corner. "I thought you might like this even better."
The next day, her grandfather taught her to ride, running beside her down the walkway. When Sophie steered out over the thick lawn and lost her balance, they both went tumbling onto the grass, rolling and laughing.
"Grand-père," Sophie said, hugging him. "I'm really sorry about the key."
"I know, sweetie. You're forgiven. I can't possibly stay mad at you. Grandfathers and granddaughters always forgive each other."
Sophie knew she shouldn't ask, but she couldn't help it. "What does it open? I never saw a key like that. It was very pretty."
Her grandfather was silent a long moment, and Sophie could see he was uncertain how to answer. 

Grand-père never lies. "It opens a box," he finally said. "Where I keep many secrets."
Sophie pouted. "I hate secrets!"
"I know, but these are important secrets. And someday, you'll learn to appreciate them as much as I do."
"I saw letters on the key, and a flower."
"Yes, that's my favorite flower. It's called a fleur-de-lis. We have them in the garden. The white ones. In English we call that kind of flower a lily."
"I know those! They're my favorite too!"
"Then I'll make a deal with you." Her grandfather's eyebrows raised the way they always did when he was about to give her a challenge. "If you can keep my key a secret, and never talk about it ever again, to me or anybody, then someday I will give it to you."
Sophie couldn't believe her ears. "You will?"
"I promise. When the time comes, the key will be yours. It has your name on it."
Sophie scowled. "No it doesn't. It said P.S. My name isn't P.S.!"
Her grandfather lowered his voice and looked around as if to make sure no one was listening. "Okay, Sophie, if you must know, P.S. is a code. It's your secret initials."
Her eyes went wide. "I have secret initials?"
"Of course. Granddaughters always have secret initials that only their grandfathers know."
"P.S.?"
He tickled her. "Princesse Sophie."
She giggled. "I'm not a princess!"
He winked. "You are to me."
From that day on, they never again spoke of the key. And she became his Princess Sophie.

Inside the Salle des Etats, Sophie stood in silence and endured the sharp pang of loss.
"The initials," Langdon whispered, eyeing her strangely. "Have you seen them?"
Sophie sensed her grandfather's voice whispering in the corridors of the museum. Never speak of this key, Sophie. To me or to anyone. She knew she had failed him in forgiveness, and she wondered if she could break his trust again. P.S. Find Robert Langdon. Her grandfather wanted Langdon to help. Sophie nodded. "Yes, I saw the initials P.S. once. When I was very young."
"Where?"
Sophie hesitated. "On something very important to him."
Langdon locked eyes with her. "Sophie, this is crucial. Can you tell me if the initials appeared with a symbol? A fleur-de-lis?"
Sophie felt herself staggering backward in amazement. "But... how could you possibly know that!"
Langdon exhaled and lowered his voice. "I'm fairly certain your grandfather was a member of a secret society. A very old covert brotherhood."
Sophie felt a knot tighten in her stomach. She was certain of it too. For ten years she had tried to forget the incident that had confirmed that horrifying fact for her. She had witnessed something unthinkable. Unforgivable.
"The fleur-de-lis," Langdon said, "combined with the initials P.S., that is the brotherhood's official device. Their coat of arms. Their logo."
"How do you know this?" Sophie was praying Langdon was not going to tell her that he himself was a member.
"I've written about this group," he said, his voice tremulous with excitement. "Researching the symbols of secret societies is a specialty of mine. They call themselves the Prieuré de Sion—the Priory of Sion. They're based here in France and attract powerful members from all over Europe. In fact, they are one of the oldest surviving secret societies on earth."
Sophie had never heard of them.
Langdon was talking in rapid bursts now. "The Priory's membership has included some of history's most cultured individuals: men like Botticelli, Sir Isaac Newton, Victor Hugo." He paused, his voice brimming now with academic zeal. "And, Leonardo da Vinci."
Sophie stared. "Da Vinci was in a secret society?"

"Da Vinci presided over the Priory between 1510 and 1519 as the brotherhood's Grand Master, which might help explain your grandfather's passion for Leonardo's work. The two men share a historical fraternal bond. And it all fits perfectly with their fascination for goddess iconology, paganism, feminine deities, and contempt for the Church. The Priory has a well-documented history of reverence for the sacred feminine."
"You're telling me this group is a pagan goddess worship cult?"
"More like the pagan goddess worship cult. But more important, they are known as the guardians of an ancient secret. One that made them immeasurably powerful."
Despite the total conviction in Langdon's eyes, Sophie's gut reaction was one of stark disbelief. A secret pagan cult? Once headed by Leonardo da Vinci? It all sounded utterly absurd. And yet, even as she dismissed it, she felt her mind reeling back ten years—to the night she had mistakenly surprised her grandfather and witnessed what she still could not accept. Could that explain—?
"The identities of living Priory members are kept extremely secret," Langdon said, "but the P.S. and fleur-de-lis that you saw as a child are proof. It could only have been related to the Priory."
Sophie realized now that Langdon knew far more about her grandfather than she had previously imagined. This American obviously had volumes to share with her, but this was not the place. "I can't afford to let them catch you, Robert. There's a lot we need to discuss. You need to go!" 
Langdon heard only the faint murmur of her voice. He wasn't going anywhere. He was lost in another place now. A place where ancient secrets rose to the surface. A place where forgotten histories emerged from the shadows.
Slowly, as if moving underwater, Langdon turned his head and gazed through the reddish haze toward the Mona Lisa.
The fleur-de-lis... the flower of Lisa... the Mona Lisa.
It was all intertwined, a silent symphony echoing the deepest secrets of the Priory of Sion and Leonardo da Vinci. 
A few miles away, on the riverbank beyond Les Invalides, the bewildered driver of a twin-bed Trailor truck stood at gunpoint and watched as the captain of the Judicial Police let out a guttural roar of rage and heaved a bar of soap out into the turgid waters of the Seine.

CHAPTER 24
Silas gazed upward at the Saint-Sulpice obelisk, taking in the length of the massive marble shaft. His sinews felt taut with exhilaration. He glanced around the church one more time to make sure he was alone. Then he knelt at the base of the structure, not out of reverence, but out of necessity.
The keystone is hidden beneath the Rose Line.
At the base of the Sulpice obelisk.
All the brothers had concurred.
On his knees now, Silas ran his hands across the stone floor. He saw no cracks or markings to indicate a movable tile, so he began rapping softly with his knuckles on the floor. Following the brass line closer to the obelisk, he knocked on each tile adjacent to the brass line. Finally, one of them echoed strangely.
There's a hollow area beneath the floor!
Silas smiled. His victims had spoken the truth.
Standing, he searched the sanctuary for something with which to break the floor tile. 
High above Silas, in the balcony, Sister Sandrine stifled a gasp. Her darkest fears had just been confirmed. This visitor was not who he seemed. The mysterious Opus Dei monk had come to Saint-Sulpice for another purpose.
A secret purpose.
You are not the only one with secrets, she thought.
Sister Sandrine Bieil was more than the keeper of this church. She was a sentry. And tonight, the ancient wheels had been set in motion. The arrival of this stranger at the base of the obelisk was a signal from the brotherhood.
It was a silent call of distress.

CHAPTER 25
The U.S. Embassy in Paris is a compact complex on Avenue Gabriel, just north of the Champs-Elysées. The three-acre compound is considered U.S. soil, meaning all those who stand on it are subject to the same laws and protections as they would encounter standing in the United States.
The embassy's night operator was reading Time magazine's International Edition when the sound of her phone interrupted.
"U.S. Embassy," she answered.
"Good evening." The caller spoke English accented with French. "I need some assistance." Despite the politeness of the man's words, his tone sounded gruff and official. "I was told you had a phone message for me on your automated system. The name is Langdon. Unfortunately, I have forgotten my three-digit access code. If you could help me, I would be most grateful."
The operator paused, confused. "I'm sorry, sir. Your message must be quite old. That system was removed two years ago for security precautions. Moreover, all the access codes were five-digit. Who told you we had a message for you?"
"You have no automated phone system?"
"No, sir. Any message for you would be handwritten in our services department. What was your name again?"
But the man had hung up. 
Bezu Fache felt dumbstruck as he paced the banks of the Seine. He was certain he had seen Langdon dial a local number, enter a three-digit code, and then listen to a recording. But if Langdon didn't phone the embassy, then who the hell did he call?
It was at that moment, eyeing his cellular phone, that Fache realized the answers were in the palm of his hand. Langdon used my phone to place that call.
Keying into the cell phone's menu, Fache pulled up the list of recently dialed numbers and found the call Langdon had placed.
A Paris exchange, followed by the three-digit code 454.
Redialing the phone number, Fache waited as the line began ringing.

Finally a woman's voice answered. "Bonjour, vous êtes bien chez Sophie Neveu," the recording announced. "Je suis absente pour le moment, mais..."
Fache's blood was boiling as he typed the numbers 4... 5... 4. 
CHAPTER 26
Despite her monumental reputation, the Mona Lisa was a mere thirty-one inches by twenty-one inches—smaller even than the posters of her sold in the Louvre gift shop. She hung on the northwest wall of the Salle des Etats behind a two-inch-thick pane of protective Plexiglas. Painted on a poplar wood panel, her ethereal, mist-filled atmosphere was attributed to Da Vinci's mastery of the sfumato style, in which forms appear to evaporate into one another.
Since taking up residence in the Louvre, the Mona Lisa—or La Jaconde as they call her in France—had been stolen twice, most recently in 1911, when she disappeared from the Louvre's "satte impénétrable"—Le Salon Carre. Parisians wept in the streets and wrote newspaper articles begging the thieves for the painting's return. Two years later, the Mona Lisa was discovered hidden in the false bottom of a trunk in a Florence hotel room.
Langdon, now having made it clear to Sophie that he had no intention of leaving, moved with her across the Salle des Etats. The Mona Lisa was still twenty yards ahead when Sophie turned on the black light, and the bluish crescent of penlight fanned out on the floor in front of them. She swung the beam back and forth across the floor like a minesweeper, searching for any hint of luminescent ink.
Walking beside her, Langdon was already feeling the tingle of anticipation that accompanied his face-to-face reunions with great works of art. He strained to see beyond the cocoon of purplish light emanating from the black light in Sophie's hand. To the left, the room's octagonal viewing divan emerged, looking like a dark island on the empty sea of parquet.
Langdon could now begin to see the panel of dark glass on the wall. Behind it, he knew, in the confines of her own private cell, hung the most celebrated painting in the world.
The Mona Lisa's status as the most famous piece of art in the world, Langdon knew, had nothing to do with her enigmatic smile. Nor was it due to the mysterious interpretations attributed her by many art historians and conspiracy buffs. Quite simply, the Mona Lisa was famous because Leonardo da Vinci claimed she was his finest accomplishment. He carried the painting with him whenever he traveled and, if asked why, would reply that he found it hard to part with his most sublime expression of female beauty.

Even so, many art historians suspected Da Vinci's reverence for the Mona Lisa had nothing to do with its artistic mastery. In actuality, the painting was a surprisingly ordinary sfumato portrait. Da Vinci's veneration for this work, many claimed, stemmed from something far deeper: a hidden message in the layers of paint. The Mona Lisa was, in fact, one of the world's most documented inside jokes. The painting's well-documented collage of double entendres and playful allusions had been revealed in most art history tomes, and yet, incredibly, the public at large still considered her smile a great mystery.
No mystery at all, Langdon thought, moving forward and watching as the faint outline of the painting began to take shape. No mystery at all.
Most recently Langdon had shared the Mona Lisa's secret with a rather unlikely group—a dozen inmates at the Essex County Penitentiary. Langdon's jail seminar was part of a Harvard outreach program attempting to bring education into the prison system—Culture for Convicts, as Langdon's colleagues liked to call it.
Standing at an overhead projector in a darkened penitentiary library, Langdon had shared the Mona Lisa's secret with the prisoners attending class, men whom he found surprisingly engaged—rough, but sharp. "You may notice," Langdon told them, walking up to the projected image of the Mona Lisa on the library wall, "that the background behind her face is uneven." Langdon motioned to the glaring discrepancy. "Da Vinci painted the horizon line on the left significantly lower than the right."
"He screwed it up?" one of the inmates asked.
Langdon chuckled. "No. Da Vinci didn't do that too often. Actually, this is a little trick Da Vinci played. By lowering the countryside on the left, Da Vinci made Mona Lisa look much larger from the left side than from the right side. A little Da Vinci inside joke. Historically, the concepts of male and female have assigned sides—left is female, and right is male. Because Da Vinci was a big fan of feminine principles, he made Mona Lisa look more majestic from the left than the right."
"I heard he was a fag," said a small man with a goatee.
Langdon winced. "Historians don't generally put it quite that way, but yes, Da Vinci was a homosexual."
"Is that why he was into that whole feminine thing?"
"Actually, Da Vinci was in tune with the balance between male and female. He believed that a human soul could not be enlightened unless it had both male and female elements."
"You mean like chicks with dicks?" someone called.

This elicited a hearty round of laughs. Langdon considered offering an etymological sidebar about the word hermaphrodite and its ties to Hermes and Aphrodite, but something told him it would be lost on this crowd.
"Hey, Mr. Langford," a muscle-bound man said. "Is it true that the Mona Lisa is a picture of Da Vinci in drag? I heard that was true."
"It's quite possible," Langdon said. "Da Vinci was a prankster, and computerized analysis of the Mona Lisa and Da Vinci's self-portraits confirm some startling points of congruency in their faces. Whatever Da Vinci was up to," Langdon said, "his Mona Lisa is neither male nor female. It carries a subtle message of androgyny. It is a fusing of both."
"You sure that's not just some Harvard bullshit way of saying Mona Lisa is one ugly chick."
Now Langdon laughed. "You may be right. But actually Da Vinci left a big clue that the painting was supposed to be androgynous. Has anyone here ever heard of an Egyptian god named Amon?"
"Hell yes!" the big guy said. "God of masculine fertility!"
Langdon was stunned.
"It says so on every box of Amon condoms." The muscular man gave a wide grin. "It's got a guy with a ram's head on the front and says he's the Egyptian god of fertility."
Langdon was not familiar with the brand name, but he was glad to hear the prophylactic manufacturers had gotten their hieroglyphs right. "Well done. Amon is indeed represented as a man with a ram's head, and his promiscuity and curved horns are related to our modern sexual slang 'horny.' "
"No shit!"
"No shit," Langdon said. "And do you know who Amon's counterpart was? The Egyptian goddess of fertility?"
The question met with several seconds of silence.
"It was Isis," Langdon told them, grabbing a grease pen. "So we have the male god, Amon." He wrote it down. "And the female goddess, Isis, whose ancient pictogram was once called L'ISA."
Langdon finished writing and stepped back from the projector.
AMON L'ISA

"Ring any bells?" he asked.
"Mona Lisa... holy crap," somebody gasped.
Langdon nodded. "Gentlemen, not only does the face of Mona Lisa look androgynous, but her name is an anagram of the divine union of male and female. And that, my friends, is Da Vinci's little secret, and the reason for Mona Lisa's knowing smile." 
"My grandfather was here," Sophie said, dropping suddenly to her knees, now only ten feet from the Mona Lisa. She pointed the black light tentatively to a spot on the parquet floor.
At first Langdon saw nothing. Then, as he knelt beside her, he saw a tiny droplet of dried liquid that was luminescing. Ink? Suddenly he recalled what black lights were actually used for. Blood. His senses tingled. Sophie was right. Jacques Saunière had indeed paid a visit to the Mona Lisa before he died.
"He wouldn't have come here without a reason," Sophie whispered, standing up. "I know he left a message for me here." Quickly striding the final few steps to the Mona Lisa, she illuminated the floor directly in front of the painting. She waved the light back and forth across the bare parquet.
"There's nothing here!"
At that moment, Langdon saw a faint purple glimmer on the protective glass before the Mona Lisa. Reaching down, he took Sophie's wrist and slowly moved the light up to the painting itself.
They both froze.
On the glass, six words glowed in purple, scrawled directly across the Mona Lisa's face. 
CHAPTER 27
Seated at Saunière's desk, Lieutenant Collet pressed the phone to his ear in disbelief. Did I hear Fache correctly? "A bar of soap? But how could Langdon have known about the GPS dot?"
"Sophie Neveu," Fache replied. "She told him."
"What! Why?"

"Damned good question, but I just heard a recording that confirms she tipped him off."
Collet was speechless. What was Neveu thinking? Fache had proof that Sophie had interfered with a DCPJ sting operation? Sophie Neveu was not only going to be fired, she was also going to jail. "But, Captain... then where is Langdon now?"
"Have any fire alarms gone off there?"
"No, sir."
"And no one has come out under the Grand Gallery gate?"
"No. We've got a Louvre security officer on the gate. Just as you requested."
"Okay, Langdon must still be inside the Grand Gallery."
"Inside? But what is he doing?"
"Is the Louvre security guard armed?"
"Yes, sir. He's a senior warden."
"Send him in," Fache commanded. "I can't get my men back to the perimeter for a few minutes, and I don't want Langdon breaking for an exit." Fache paused. "And you'd better tell the guard Agent Neveu is probably in there with him."
"Agent Neveu left, I thought."
"Did you actually see her leave?"
"No, sir, but—"
"Well, nobody on the perimeter saw her leave either. They only saw her go in."
Collet was flabbergasted by Sophie Neveu's bravado. She's still inside the building?
"Handle it," Fache ordered. "I want Langdon and Neveu at gunpoint by the time I get back." 
As the Trailor truck drove off, Captain Fache rounded up his men. Robert Langdon had proven an elusive quarry tonight, and with Agent Neveu now helping him, he might be far harder to corner than expected.

Fache decided not to take any chances.
Hedging his bets, he ordered half of his men back to the Louvre perimeter. The other half he sent to guard the only location in Paris where Robert Langdon could find safe harbor. 
CHAPTER 28
Inside the Salle des Etats, Langdon stared in astonishment at the six words glowing on the Plexiglas. The text seemed to hover in space, casting a jagged shadow across Mona Lisa's mysterious smile.
"The Priory," Langdon whispered. "This proves your grandfather was a member!"
Sophie looked at him in confusion. "You understand this?"
"It's flawless," Langdon said, nodding as his thoughts churned. "It's a proclamation of one of the Priory's most fundamental philosophies!"
Sophie looked baffled in the glow of the message scrawled across the Mona Lisa's face.
SO DARK THE CON OF MAN 
"Sophie," Langdon said, "the Priory's tradition of perpetuating goddess worship is based on a belief that powerful men in the early Christian church 'conned' the world by propagating lies that devalued the female and tipped the scales in favor of the masculine."
Sophie remained silent, staring at the words.
"The Priory believes that Constantine and his male successors successfully converted the world from matriarchal paganism to patriarchal Christianity by waging a campaign of propaganda that demonized the sacred feminine, obliterating the goddess from modern religion forever."
Sophie's expression remained uncertain. "My grandfather sent me to this spot to find this. He must be trying to tell me more than that."
Langdon understood her meaning. She thinks this is another code. Whether a hidden meaning existed here or not, Langdon could not immediately say. His mind was still grappling with the bold clarity of Saunière's outward message.

So dark the con of man, he thought. So dark indeed.
Nobody could deny the enormous good the modern Church did in today's troubled world, and yet the Church had a deceitful and violent history. Their brutal crusade to "reeducate" the pagan and feminine-worshipping religions spanned three centuries, employing methods as inspired as they were horrific.
The Catholic Inquisition published the book that arguably could be called the most blood-soaked publication in human history. Malleus Maleficarum—or The Witches' Hammer—indoctrinated the world to "the dangers of freethinking women" and instructed the clergy how to locate, torture, and destroy them. Those deemed "witches" by the Church included all female scholars, priestesses, gypsies, mystics, nature lovers, herb gatherers, and any women "suspiciously attuned to the natural world." Midwives also were killed for their heretical practice of using medical knowledge to ease the pain of childbirth—a suffering, the Church claimed, that was God's rightful punishment for Eve's partaking of the Apple of Knowledge, thus giving birth to the idea of Original Sin. During three hundred years of witch hunts, the Church burned at the stake an astounding five million women.
The propaganda and bloodshed had worked.
Today's world was living proof.
Women, once celebrated as an essential half of spiritual enlightenment, had been banished from the temples of the world. There were no female Orthodox rabbis, Catholic priests, nor Islamic clerics. The once hallowed act of Hieros Gamos—the natural sexual union between man and woman through which each became spiritually whole—had been recast as a shameful act. Holy men who had once required sexual union with their female counterparts to commune with God now feared their natural sexual urges as the work of the devil, collaborating with his favorite accomplice... woman.
Not even the feminine association with the left-hand side could escape the Church's defamation. In France and Italy, the words for "left"—gauche and sinistra—came to have deeply negative overtones, while their right-hand counterparts rang of righteousness, dexterity, and correctness. To this day, radical thought was considered left wing, irrational thought was left brain, and anything evil, sinister.
The days of the goddess were over. The pendulum had swung. Mother Earth had become a man's world, and the gods of destruction and war were taking their toll. The male ego had spent two millennia running unchecked by its female counterpart. The Priory of Sion believed that it was this obliteration of the sacred feminine in modern life that had caused what the Hopi Native Americans called koyanisquatsi—"life out of balance"—an unstable situation marked by testosterone-fueled wars, a plethora of misogynistic societies, and a growing disrespect for Mother Earth.

"Robert!" Sophie said, her whisper yanking him back. "Someone's coming!"
He heard the approaching footsteps out in the hallway.
"Over here!" Sophie extinguished the black light and seemed to evaporate before Langdon's eyes.
For an instant he felt totally blind. Over where! As his vision cleared he saw Sophie's silhouette racing toward the center of the room and ducking out of sight behind the octagonal viewing bench. He was about to dash after her when a booming voice stopped him cold.
"Arrêtez!" a man commanded from the doorway.
The Louvre security agent advanced through the entrance to the Salle des Etats, his pistol outstretched, taking deadly aim at Langdon's chest.
Langdon felt his arms raise instinctively for the ceiling.
"Couchez-vous!" the guard commanded. "Lie down!"
Langdon was face first on the floor in a matter of seconds. The guard hurried over and kicked his legs apart, spreading Langdon out.
"Mauvaise idée, Monsieur Langdon," he said, pressing the gun hard into Langdon's back. "Mauvaise idée."
Face down on the parquet floor with his arms and legs spread wide, Langdon found little humor in the irony of his position. The Vitruvian Man, he thought. Face down. 
CHAPTER 29
Inside Saint-Sulpice, Silas carried the heavy iron votive candle holder from the altar back toward the obelisk. The shaft would do nicely as a battering ram. Eyeing the gray marble panel that covered the apparent hollow in the floor, he realized he could not possibly shatter the covering without making considerable noise.
Iron on marble. It would echo off the vaulted ceilings.
Would the nun hear him? She should be asleep by now. Even so, it was a chance Silas preferred not to take. Looking around for a cloth to wrap around the tip of the iron pole, he saw nothing except the altar's linen mantle, which he refused to defile. My cloak, he thought. Knowing he was alone in the great church, Silas untied his cloak and slipped it off his body. As he removed it, he 

felt a sting as the wool fibers stuck to the fresh wounds on his back.
Naked now, except for his loin swaddle, Silas wrapped his cloak over the end of the iron rod. Then, aiming at the center of the floor tile, he drove the tip into it. A muffled thud. The stone did not break. He drove the pole into it again. Again a dull thud, but this time accompanied by a crack. On the third swing, the covering finally shattered, and stone shards fell into a hollow area beneath the floor.
A compartment!
Quickly pulling the remaining pieces from the opening, Silas gazed into the void. His blood pounded as he knelt down before it. Raising his pale bare arm, he reached inside.
At first he felt nothing. The floor of the compartment was bare, smooth stone. Then, feeling deeper, reaching his arm in under the Rose Line, he touched something! A thick stone tablet. Getting his fingers around the edge, he gripped it and gently lifted the tablet out. As he stood and examined his find, he realized he was holding a rough-hewn stone slab with engraved words. He felt for an instant like a modern-day Moses.
As Silas read the words on the tablet, he felt surprise. He had expected the keystone to be a map, or a complex series of directions, perhaps even encoded. The keystone, however, bore the simplest of inscriptions.
Job 38:11
A Bible verse? Silas was stunned with the devilish simplicity. The secret location of that which they sought was revealed in a Bible verse? The brotherhood stopped at nothing to mock the righteous!
Job. Chapter thirty-eight. Verse eleven.
Although Silas did not recall the exact contents of verse eleven by heart, he knew the Book of Job told the story of a man whose faith in God survived repeated tests. Appropriate, he thought, barely able to contain his excitement.
Looking over his shoulder, he gazed down the shimmering Rose Line and couldn't help but smile. There atop the main altar, propped open on a gilded book stand, sat an enormous leather-bound Bible. 
Up in the balcony, Sister Sandrine was shaking. Moments ago, she had been about to flee and carry out her orders, when the man below suddenly removed his cloak. When she saw his alabaster-white 

flesh, she was overcome with a horrified bewilderment. His broad, pale back was soaked with blood-red slashes. Even from here she could see the wounds were fresh.
This man has been mercilessly whipped!
She also saw the bloody cilice around his thigh, the wound beneath it dripping. What kind of God would want a body punished this way? The rituals of Opus Dei, Sister Sandrine knew, were not something she would ever understand. But that was hardly her concern at this instant. Opus Dei is searching for the keystone. How they knew of it, Sister Sandrine could not imagine, although she knew she did not have time to think.
The bloody monk was now quietly donning his cloak again, clutching his prize as he moved toward the altar, toward the Bible.
In breathless silence, Sister Sandrine left the balcony and raced down the hall to her quarters. Getting on her hands and knees, she reached beneath her wooden bed frame and retrieved the sealed envelope she had hidden there years ago.
Tearing it open, she found four Paris phone numbers.
Trembling, she began to dial. 
Downstairs, Silas laid the stone tablet on the altar and turned his eager hands to the leather Bible. His long white fingers were sweating now as he turned the pages. Flipping through the Old Testament, he found the Book of Job. He located chapter thirty-eight. As he ran his finger down the column of text, he anticipated the words he was about to read.
They will lead the way!
Finding verse number eleven, Silas read the text. It was only seven words. Confused, he read it again, sensing something had gone terribly wrong. The verse simply read:
HITHERTO SHALT THOU COME, BUT NO FURTHER. 
CHAPTER 30
Security warden Claude Grouard simmered with rage as he stood over his prostrate captive in front of the Mona Lisa. This bastard killed Jacques Saunière! Saunière had been like a well-loved father to Grouard and his security team.

Grouard wanted nothing more than to pull the trigger and bury a bullet in Robert Langdon's back. As senior warden, Grouard was one of the few guards who actually carried a loaded weapon. He reminded himself, however, that killing Langdon would be a generous fate compared to the misery about to be communicated by Bezu Fache and the French prison system.
Grouard yanked his walkie-talkie off his belt and attempted to radio for backup. All he heard was static. The additional electronic security in this chamber always wrought havoc with the guards' communications. I have to move to the doorway. Still aiming his weapon at Langdon, Grouard began backing slowly toward the entrance. On his third step, he spied something that made him stop short.
What the hell is that!
An inexplicable mirage was materializing near the center of the room. A silhouette. There was someone else in the room? A woman was moving through the darkness, walking briskly toward the far left wall. In front of her, a purplish beam of light swung back and forth across the floor, as if she were searching for something with a colored flashlight.
"Qui est là?" Grouard demanded, feeling his adrenaline spike for a second time in the last thirty seconds. He suddenly didn't know where to aim his gun or what direction to move.
"PTS," the woman replied calmly, still scanning the floor with her light.
Police Technique et Scientifique. Grouard was sweating now. I thought all the agents were gone! He now recognized the purple light as ultraviolet, consistent with a PTS team, and yet he could not understand why DCPJ would be looking for evidence in here.
"Votre nom!" Grouard yelled, instinct telling him something was amiss. "Répondez!"
"C'est mot," the voice responded in calm French. "Sophie Neveu."
Somewhere in the distant recesses of Grouard's mind, the name registered. Sophie Neveu? That was the name of Saunière's granddaughter, wasn't it? She used to come in here as a little kid, but that was years ago. This couldn't possibly be her! And even if it were Sophie Neveu, that was hardly a reason to trust her; Grouard had heard the rumors of the painful falling-out between Saunière and his granddaughter.
"You know me," the woman called. "And Robert Langdon did not kill my grandfather. Believe me."
Warden Grouard was not about to take that on faith. I need backup! Trying his walkie-talkie again, he got only static. The entrance was still a good twenty yards behind him, and Grouard began 

backing up slowly, choosing to leave his gun trained on the man on the floor. As Grouard inched backward, he could see the woman across the room raising her UV light and scrutinizing a large painting that hung on the far side of the Salle des Etats, directly opposite the Mona Lisa.
Grouard gasped, realizing which painting it was.
What in the name of God is she doing? 
Across the room, Sophie Neveu felt a cold sweat breaking across her forehead. Langdon was still spread-eagle on the floor. Hold on, Robert. Almost there. Knowing the guard would never actually shoot either of them, Sophie now turned her attention back to the matter at hand, scanning the entire area around one masterpiece in particular—another Da Vinci. But the UV light revealed nothing out of the ordinary. Not on the floor, on the walls, or even on the canvas itself.
There must be something here!
Sophie felt totally certain she had deciphered her grandfather's intentions correctly.
What else could he possibly intend?
The masterpiece she was examining was a five-foot-tall canvas. The bizarre scene Da Vinci had painted included an awkwardly posed Virgin Mary sitting with Baby Jesus, John the Baptist, and the Angel Uriel on a perilous outcropping of rocks. When Sophie was a little girl, no trip to the Mona Lisa had been complete without her grandfather dragging her across the room to see this second painting.
Grand-père, I'm here! But I don't see it!
Behind her, Sophie could hear the guard trying to radio again for help.
Think!
She pictured the message scrawled on the protective glass of the Mona Lisa. So dark the con of man. The painting before her had no protective glass on which to write a message, and Sophie knew her grandfather would never have defaced this masterpiece by writing on the painting itself. She paused. At least not on the front. Her eyes shot upward, climbing the long cables that dangled from the ceiling to support the canvas.
Could that be it? Grabbing the left side of the carved wood frame, she pulled it toward her. The painting was large and the backing flexed as she swung it away from the wall. Sophie slipped her head and shoulders in behind the painting and raised the black light to inspect the back.

It took only seconds to realize her instinct had been wrong. The back of the painting was pale and blank. There was no purple text here, only the mottled brown backside of aging canvas and—
Wait.
Sophie's eyes locked on an incongruous glint of lustrous metal lodged near the bottom edge of the frame's wooden armature. The object was small, partially wedged in the slit where the canvas met the frame. A shimmering gold chain dangled off it.
To Sophie's utter amazement, the chain was affixed to a familiar gold key. The broad, sculpted head was in the shape of a cross and bore an engraved seal she had not seen since she was nine years old. A fleur-de-lis with the initials P.S. In that instant, Sophie felt the ghost of her grandfather whispering in her ear. When the time comes, the key will be yours. A tightness gripped her throat as she realized that her grandfather, even in death, had kept his promise. This key opens a box, his voice was saying, where I keep many secrets.
Sophie now realized that the entire purpose of tonight's word game had been this key. Her grandfather had it with him when he was killed. Not wanting it to fall into the hands of the police, he hid it behind this painting. Then he devised an ingenious treasure hunt to ensure only Sophie would find it.
"Au secours!" the guard's voice yelled.
Sophie snatched the key from behind the painting and slipped it deep in her pocket along with the UV penlight. Peering out from behind the canvas, she could see the guard was still trying desperately to raise someone on the walkie-talkie. He was backing toward the entrance, still aiming the gun firmly at Langdon.
"Au secours!" he shouted again into his radio.
Static.
He can't transmit, Sophie realized, recalling that tourists with cell phones often got frustrated in here when they tried to call home to brag about seeing the Mona Lisa. The extra surveillance wiring in the walls made it virtually impossible to get a carrier unless you stepped out into the hall. The guard was backing quickly toward the exit now, and Sophie knew she had to act immediately.
Gazing up at the large painting behind which she was partially ensconced, Sophie realized that Leonardo da Vinci, for the second time tonight, was there to help. 
Another few meters, Grouard told himself, keeping his gun leveled.

"Arrêtez! Ou je la détruis!" the woman's voice echoed across the room.
Grouard glanced over and stopped in his tracks. "Mon dieu, non!"
Through the reddish haze, he could see that the woman had actually lifted the large painting off its cables and propped it on the floor in front of her. At five feet tall, the canvas almost entirely hid her body. Grouard's first thought was to wonder why the painting's trip wires hadn't set off alarms, but of course the artwork cable sensors had yet to be reset tonight. What is she doing!
When he saw it, his blood went cold.
The canvas started to bulge in the middle, the fragile outlines of the Virgin Mary, Baby Jesus, and John the Baptist beginning to distort.
"Non!" Grouard screamed, frozen in horror as he watched the priceless Da Vinci stretching. The woman was pushing her knee into the center of the canvas from behind! "NON!"
Grouard wheeled and aimed his gun at her but instantly realized it was an empty threat. The canvas was only fabric, but it was utterly impenetrable—a six-million-dollar piece of body armor.
I can't put a bullet through a Da Vinci!
"Set down your gun and radio," the woman said in calm French, "or I'll put my knee through this painting. I think you know how my grandfather would feel about that."
Grouard felt dizzy. "Please... no. That's Madonna of the Rocks!" He dropped his gun and radio, raising his hands over his head.
"Thank you," the woman said. "Now do exactly as I tell you, and everything will work out fine." 
Moments later, Langdon's pulse was still thundering as he ran beside Sophie down the emergency stairwell toward the ground level. Neither of them had said a word since leaving the trembling Louvre guard lying in the Salle des Etats. The guard's pistol was now clutched tightly in Langdon's hands, and he couldn't wait to get rid of it. The weapon felt heavy and dangerously foreign.
Taking the stairs two at a time, Langdon wondered if Sophie had any idea how valuable a painting she had almost ruined. Her choice in art seemed eerily pertinent to tonight's adventure. The Da Vinci she had grabbed, much like the Mona Lisa, was notorious among art historians for its plethora of hidden pagan symbolism.

"You chose a valuable hostage," he said as they ran.
"Madonna of the Rocks," she replied. "But I didn't choose it, my grandfather did. He left me a little something behind the painting."
Langdon shot her a startled look. "What!? But how did you know which painting? Why Madonna of the Rocks?"
"So dark the con of man." She flashed a triumphant smile. "I missed the first two anagrams, Robert. I wasn't about to miss the third."
CHAPTER 31
"They're dead!" Sister Sandrine stammered into the telephone in her Saint-Sulpice residence. She was leaving a message on an answering machine. "Please pick up! They're all dead!"
The first three phone numbers on the list had produced terrifying results—a hysterical widow, a detective working late at a murder scene, and a somber priest consoling a bereaved family. All three contacts were dead. And now, as she called the fourth and final number—the number she was not supposed to call unless the first three could not be reached—she got an answering machine. The outgoing message offered no name but simply asked the caller to leave a message.
"The floor panel has been broken!" she pleaded as she left the message. "The other three are dead!"
Sister Sandrine did not know the identities of the four men she protected, but the private phone numbers stashed beneath her bed were for use on only one condition.
If that floor panel is ever broken, the faceless messenger had told her, it means the upper echelon has been breached. One of us has been mortally threatened and been forced to tell a desperate lie. Call the numbers. Warn the others. Do not fail us in this.
It was a silent alarm. Foolproof in its simplicity. The plan had amazed her when she first heard it. If the identity of one brother was compromised, he could tell a lie that would start in motion a mechanism to warn the others. Tonight, however, it seemed that more than one had been compromised.
"Please answer," she whispered in fear. "Where are you?"
"Hang up the phone," a deep voice said from the doorway.
Turning in terror, she saw the massive monk. He was clutching the heavy iron candle stand. 

Shaking, she set the phone back in the cradle.
"They are dead," the monk said. "All four of them. And they have played me for a fool. Tell me where the keystone is."
"I don't know!" Sister Sandrine said truthfully. "That secret is guarded by others." Others who are dead!
The man advanced, his white fists gripping the iron stand. "You are a sister of the Church, and yet you serve them?"
"Jesus had but one true message," Sister Sandrine said defiantly. "I cannot see that message in Opus Dei."
A sudden explosion of rage erupted behind the monk's eyes. He lunged, lashing out with the candle stand like a club. As Sister Sandrine fell, her last feeling was an overwhelming sense of foreboding.
All four are dead.
The precious truth is lost forever. 
CHAPTER 32
The security alarm on the west end of the Denon Wing sent the pigeons in the nearby Tuileries Gardens scattering as Langdon and Sophie dashed out of the bulkhead into the Paris night. As they ran across the plaza to Sophie's car, Langdon could hear police sirens wailing in the distance.
"That's it there," Sophie called, pointing to a red snub-nosed two-seater parked on the plaza.
She's kidding, right? The vehicle was easily the smallest car Langdon had ever seen.
"SmartCar," she said. "A hundred kilometers to the liter."
Langdon had barely thrown himself into the passenger seat before Sophie gunned the SmartCar up and over a curb onto a gravel divider. He gripped the dash as the car shot out across a sidewalk and bounced back down over into the small rotary at Carrousel du Louvre.
For an instant, Sophie seemed to consider taking the shortcut across the rotary by plowing straight ahead, through the median's perimeter hedge, and bisecting the large circle of grass in the center.

"No!" Langdon shouted, knowing the hedges around Carrousel du Louvre were there to hide the perilous chasm in the center—La Pyramide Inversée—the upside-down pyramid skylight he had seen earlier from inside the museum. It was large enough to swallow their Smart-Car in a single gulp. Fortunately, Sophie decided on the more conventional route, jamming the wheel hard to the right, circling properly until she exited, cut left, and swung into the northbound lane, accelerating toward Rue de Rivoli.
The two-tone police sirens blared louder behind them, and Langdon could see the lights now in his side view mirror. The SmartCar engine whined in protest as Sophie urged it faster away from the Louvre. Fifty yards ahead, the traffic light at Rivoli turned red. Sophie cursed under her breath and kept racing toward it. Langdon felt his muscles tighten.
"Sophie?"
Slowing only slightly as they reached the intersection, Sophie flicked her headlights and stole a quick glance both ways before flooring the accelerator again and carving a sharp left turn through the empty intersection onto Rivoli. Accelerating west for a quarter of a mile, Sophie banked to the right around a wide rotary. Soon they were shooting out the other side onto the wide avenue of Champs-Elysées.
As they straightened out, Langdon turned in his seat, craning his neck to look out the rear window toward the Louvre. The police did not seem to be chasing them. The sea of blue lights was assembling at the museum.
His heartbeat finally slowing, Langdon turned back around. "That was interesting."
Sophie didn't seem to hear. Her eyes remained fixed ahead down the long thoroughfare of Champs-Elysées, the two-mile stretch of posh storefronts that was often called the Fifth Avenue of Paris. The embassy was only about a mile away, and Langdon settled into his seat. So dark the con of man. Sophie's quick thinking had been impressive. Madonna of the Rocks.
Sophie had said her grandfather left her something behind the painting. A final message? Langdon could not help but marvel over Saunière's brilliant hiding place; Madonna of the Rocks was yet another fitting link in the evening's chain of interconnected symbolism. Saunière, it seemed, at every turn, was reinforcing his fondness for the dark and mischievous side of Leonardo da Vinci.
Da Vinci's original commission for Madonna of the Rocks had come from an organization known as the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception, which needed a painting for the centerpiece of an altar triptych in their church of San Francesco in Milan. The nuns gave Leonardo specific dimensions, and the desired theme for the painting—the Virgin Mary, baby John the Baptist, Uriel, and Baby Jesus sheltering in a cave. Although Da Vinci did as they requested, when he delivered the work, the group reacted with horror. He had filled the painting with explosive and disturbing details.

The painting showed a blue-robed Virgin Mary sitting with her arm around an infant child, presumably Baby Jesus. Opposite Mary sat Uriel, also with an infant, presumably baby John the Baptist. Oddly, though, rather than the usual Jesus-blessing-John scenario, it was baby John who was blessing Jesus... and Jesus was submitting to his authority! More troubling still, Mary was holding one hand high above the head of infant John and making a decidedly threatening gesture—her fingers looking like eagle's talons, gripping an invisible head. Finally, the most obvious and frightening image: Just below Mary's curled fingers, Uriel was making a cutting gesture with his hand—as if slicing the neck of the invisible head gripped by Mary's claw-like hand.
Langdon's students were always amused to learn that Da Vinci eventually mollified the confraternity by painting them a second, "watered-down" version of Madonna of the Rocks in which everyone was arranged in a more orthodox manner. The second version now hung in London's National Gallery under the name Virgin of the Rocks, although Langdon still preferred the Louvre's more intriguing original.
As Sophie gunned the car up Champs-Elysées, Langdon said, "The painting. What was behind it?"
Her eyes remained on the road. "I'll show you once we're safely inside the embassy."
"You'll show it to me?" Langdon was surprised. "He left you a physical object?"
Sophie gave a curt nod. "Embossed with a fleur-de-lis and the initials P.S."
Langdon couldn't believe his ears. 
We're going to make it, Sophie thought as she swung the SmartCar's wheel to the right, cutting sharply past the luxurious Hôtel de Crillon into Paris's tree-lined diplomatic neighborhood. The embassy was less than a mile away now. She was finally feeling like she could breathe normally again.
Even as she drove, Sophie's mind remained locked on the key in her pocket, her memories of seeing it many years ago, the gold head shaped as an equal-armed cross, the triangular shaft, the indentations, the embossed flowery seal, and the letters P.S.
Although the key barely had entered Sophie's thoughts through the years, her work in the intelligence community had taught her plenty about security, and now the key's peculiar tooling no longer looked so mystifying. A laser-tooled varying matrix. Impossible to duplicate. Rather than teeth that moved tumblers, this key's complex series of laser-burned pockmarks was examined by an electric eye. If the eye determined that the hexagonal pockmarks were correctly spaced, 

arranged, and rotated, then the lock would open.
Sophie could not begin to imagine what a key like this opened, but she sensed Robert would be able to tell her. After all, he had described the key's embossed seal without ever seeing it. The cruciform on top implied the key belonged to some kind of Christian organization, and yet Sophie knew of no churches that used laser-tooled varying matrix keys.
Besides, my grandfather was no Christian....
Sophie had witnessed proof of that ten years ago. Ironically, it had been another key—a far more normal one—that had revealed his true nature to her.
The afternoon had been warm when she landed at Charles de Gaulle Airport and hailed a taxi home. Grand-père will be so surprised to see me, she thought. Returning from graduate school in Britain for spring break a few days early, Sophie couldn't wait to see him and tell him all about the encryption methods she was studying.
When she arrived at their Paris home, however, her grandfather was not there. Disappointed, she knew he had not been expecting her and was probably working at the Louvre. But it's Saturday afternoon, she realized. He seldom worked on weekends. On weekends, he usually—
Grinning, Sophie ran out to the garage. Sure enough, his car was gone. It was the weekend. Jacques Saunière despised city driving and owned a car for one destination only—his vacation château in Normandy, north of Paris. Sophie, after months in the congestion of London, was eager for the smells of nature and to start her vacation right away. It was still early evening, and she decided to leave immediately and surprise him. Borrowing a friend's car, Sophie drove north, winding into the deserted moon-swept hills near Creully. She arrived just after ten o'clock, turning down the long private driveway toward her grandfather's retreat. The access road was over a mile long, and she was halfway down it before she could start to see the house through the trees—a mammoth, old stone château nestled in the woods on the side of a hill.
Sophie had half expected to find her grandfather asleep at this hour and was excited to see the house twinkling with lights. Her delight turned to surprise, however, when she arrived to find the driveway filled with parked cars—Mercedeses, BMWs, Audis, and a Rolls-Royce.
Sophie stared a moment and then burst out laughing. My grand-père, the famous recluse! Jacques Saunière, it seemed, was far less reclusive than he liked to pretend. Clearly he was hosting a party while Sophie was away at school, and from the looks of the automobiles, some of Paris's most influential people were in attendance.
Eager to surprise him, she hurried to the front door. When she got there, though, she found it locked. She knocked. Nobody answered. Puzzled, she walked around and tried the back door. It too was locked. No answer.

Confused, she stood a moment and listened. The only sound she heard was the cool Normandy air letting out a low moan as it swirled through the valley.
No music.
No voices.
Nothing.
In the silence of the woods, Sophie hurried to the side of the house and clambered up on a woodpile, pressing her face to the living room window. What she saw inside made no sense at all.
"Nobody's here!"
The entire first floor looked deserted.
Where are all the people?
Heart racing, Sophie ran to the woodshed and got the spare key her grandfather kept hidden under the kindling box. She ran to the front door and let herself in. As she stepped into the deserted foyer, the control panel for the security system started blinking red—a warning that the entrant had ten seconds to type the proper code before the security alarms went off.
He has the alarm on during a party?
Sophie quickly typed the code and deactivated the system.
Entering, she found the entire house uninhabited. Upstairs too. As she descended again to the deserted living room, she stood a moment in the silence, wondering what could possibly be happening.
It was then that Sophie heard it.
Muffled voices. And they seemed to be coming from underneath her. Sophie could not imagine. Crouching, she put her ear to the floor and listened. Yes, the sound was definitely coming from below. The voices seemed to be singing, or... chanting? She was frightened. Almost more eerie than the sound itself was the realization that this house did not even have a basement.
At least none I've ever seen.
Turning now and scanning the living room, Sophie's eyes fell to the only object in the entire house that seemed out of place—her grandfather's favorite antique, a sprawling Aubusson tapestry. It usually hung on the east wall beside the fireplace, but tonight it had been pulled aside on its brass 

rod, exposing the wall behind it.
Walking toward the bare wooden wall, Sophie sensed the chanting getting louder. Hesitant, she leaned her ear against the wood. The voices were clearer now. People were definitely chanting... intoning words Sophie could not discern.
The space behind this wall is hollow!
Feeling around the edge of the panels, Sophie found a recessed fingerhold. It was discreetly crafted. A sliding door. Heart pounding, she placed her finger in the slot and pulled it. With noiseless precision, the heavy wall slid sideways. From out of the darkness beyond, the voices echoed up.
Sophie slipped through the door and found herself on a rough-hewn stone staircase that spiraled downward. She'd been coming to this house since she was a child and yet had no idea this staircase even existed!
As she descended, the air grew cooler. The voices clearer. She heard men and women now. Her line of sight was limited by the spiral of the staircase, but the last step was now rounding into view. Beyond it, she could see a small patch of the basement floor—stone, illuminated by the flickering orange blaze of firelight.
Holding her breath, Sophie inched down another few steps and crouched down to look. It took her several seconds to process what she was seeing.
The room was a grotto—a coarse chamber that appeared to have been hollowed from the granite of the hillside. The only light came from torches on the walls. In the glow of the flames, thirty or so people stood in a circle in the center of the room.
I'm dreaming, Sophie told herself. A dream. What else could this be?
Everyone in the room was wearing a mask. The women were dressed in white gossamer gowns and golden shoes. Their masks were white, and in their hands they carried golden orbs. The men wore long black tunics, and their masks were black. They looked like pieces in a giant chess set. Everyone in the circle rocked back and forth and chanted in reverence to something on the floor before them... something Sophie could not see.
The chanting grew steady again. Accelerating. Thundering now. Faster. The participants took a step inward and knelt. In that instant, Sophie could finally see what they all were witnessing. Even as she staggered back in horror, she felt the image searing itself into her memory forever. Overtaken by nausea, Sophie spun, clutching at the stone walls as she clambered back up the stairs. Pulling the door closed, she fled the deserted house, and drove in a tearful stupor back to Paris.

That night, with her life shattered by disillusionment and betrayal, she packed her belongings and left her home. On the dining room table, she left a note.
I WAS THERE. DON'T TRY TO FIND ME. 
Beside the note, she laid the old spare key from the château's woodshed. 
"Sophie! Langdon's voice intruded. "Stop! Stop!"
Emerging from the memory, Sophie slammed on the brakes, skidding to a halt. "What? What happened?!"
Langdon pointed down the long street before them.
When she saw it, Sophie's blood went cold. A hundred yards ahead, the intersection was blocked by a couple of DCPJ police cars, parked askew, their purpose obvious. They've sealed off Avenue Gabriel!
Langdon gave a grim sigh. "I take it the embassy is off-limits this evening?"
Down the street, the two DCPJ officers who stood beside their cars were now staring in their direction, apparently curious about the headlights that had halted so abruptly up the street from them.
Okay, Sophie, turn around very slowly.
Putting the SmartCar in reverse, she performed a composed three-point turn and reversed her direction. As she drove away, she heard the sound of squealing tires behind them. Sirens blared to life.
Cursing, Sophie slammed down the accelerator. 
CHAPTER 33
Sophie's SmartCar tore through the diplomatic quarter, weaving past embassies and consulates, finally racing out a side street and taking a right turn back onto the massive thoroughfare of Champs-Elysées.

Langdon sat white-knuckled in the passenger seat, twisted backward, scanning behind them for any signs of the police. He suddenly wished he had not decided to run. You didn't, he reminded himself. Sophie had made the decision for him when she threw the GPS dot out the bathroom window. Now, as they sped away from the embassy, serpentining through sparse traffic on Champs-Elysées, Langdon felt his options deteriorating. Although Sophie seemed to have lost the police, at least for the moment, Langdon doubted their luck would hold for long.
Behind the wheel Sophie was fishing in her sweater pocket. She removed a small metal object and held it out for him. "Robert, you'd better have a look at this. This is what my grandfather left me behind Madonna of the Rocks."
Feeling a shiver of anticipation, Langdon took the object and examined it. It was heavy and shaped like a cruciform. His first instinct was that he was holding a funeral pieu—a miniature version of a memorial spike designed to be stuck into the ground at a gravesite. But then he noted the shaft protruding from the cruciform was prismatic and triangular. The shaft was also pockmarked with hundreds of tiny hexagons that appeared to be finely tooled and scattered at random.
"It's a laser-cut key," Sophie told him. "Those hexagons are read by an electric eye."
A key? Langdon had never seen anything like it.
"Look at the other side," she said, changing lanes and sailing through an intersection.
When Langdon turned the key, he felt his jaw drop. There, intricately embossed on the center of the cross, was a stylized fleur-de-lis with the initials P.S.! "Sophie," he said, "this is the seal I told you about! The official device of the Priory of Sion."
She nodded. "As I told you, I saw the key a long time ago. He told me never to speak of it again."
Langdon's eyes were still riveted on the embossed key. Its high-tech tooling and age-old symbolism exuded an eerie fusion of ancient and modern worlds.
"He told me the key opened a box where he kept many secrets."
Langdon felt a chill to imagine what kind of secrets a man like Jacques Saunière might keep. What an ancient brotherhood was doing with a futuristic key, Langdon had no idea. The Priory existed for the sole purpose of protecting a secret. A secret of incredible power. Could this key have something to do with it? The thought was overwhelming. "Do you know what it opens?"
Sophie looked disappointed. "I was hoping you knew."
Langdon remained silent as he turned the cruciform in his hand, examining it.

"It looks Christian," Sophie pressed.
Langdon was not so sure about that. The head of this key was not the traditional long-stemmed Christian cross but rather was a square cross—with four arms of equal length—which predated Christianity by fifteen hundred years. This kind of cross carried none of the Christian connotations of crucifixion associated with the longer-stemmed Latin Cross, originated by Romans as a torture device. Langdon was always surprised how few Christians who gazed upon "the crucifix" realized their symbol's violent history was reflected in its very name: "cross" and "crucifix" came from the Latin verb cruciare—to torture.
"Sophie," he said, "all I can tell you is that equal-armed crosses like this one are considered peaceful crosses. Their square configurations make them impractical for use in crucifixion, and their balanced vertical and horizontal elements convey a natural union of male and female, making them symbolically consistent with Priory philosophy."
She gave him a weary look. "You have no idea, do you?"
Langdon frowned. "Not a clue."
"Okay, we have to get off the road." Sophie checked her rearview mirror. "We need a safe place to figure out what that key opens."
Langdon thought longingly of his comfortable room at the Ritz. Obviously, that was not an option. "How about my hosts at the American University of Paris?"
"Too obvious. Fache will check with them."
"You must know people. You live here."
"Fache will run my phone and e-mail records, talk to my coworkers. My contacts are compromised, and finding a hotel is no good because they all require identification."
Langdon wondered again if he might have been better off taking his chances letting Fache arrest him at the Louvre. "Let's call the embassy. I can explain the situation and have the embassy send someone to meet us somewhere."
"Meet us?" Sophie turned and stared at him as if he were crazy. "Robert, you're dreaming. Your embassy has no jurisdiction except on their own property. Sending someone to retrieve us would be considered aiding a fugitive of the French government. It won't happen. If you walk into your embassy and request temporary asylum, that's one thing, but asking them to take action against French law enforcement in the field?" She shook her head. "Call your embassy right now, and they are going to tell you to avoid further damage and turn yourself over to Fache. Then they'll promise to pursue diplomatic channels to get you a fair trial." She gazed up the line of elegant storefronts on 

Champs-Elysées. "How much cash do you have?"
Langdon checked his wallet. "A hundred dollars. A few euro. Why?"
"Credit cards?"
"Of course."
As Sophie accelerated, Langdon sensed she was formulating a plan. Dead ahead, at the end of Champs-Elysées, stood the Arc de Triomphe—Napoleon's 164-foot-tall tribute to his own military potency—encircled by France's largest rotary, a nine-lane behemoth.
Sophie's eyes were on the rearview mirror again as they approached the rotary. "We lost them for the time being," she said, "but we won't last another five minutes if we stay in this car."
So steal a different one, Langdon mused, now that we're criminals. "What are you going to do?"
Sophie gunned the SmartCar into the rotary. "Trust me."
Langdon made no response. Trust had not gotten him very far this evening. Pulling back the sleeve of his jacket, he checked his watch—a vintage, collector's-edition Mickey Mouse wristwatch that had been a gift from his parents on his tenth birthday. Although its juvenile dial often drew odd looks, Langdon had never owned any other watch; Disney animations had been his first introduction to the magic of form and color, and Mickey now served as Langdon's daily reminder to stay young at heart. At the moment, however, Mickey's arms were skewed at an awkward angle, indicating an equally awkward hour.
2:51 A.M.
"Interesting watch," Sophie said, glancing at his wrist and maneuvering the SmartCar around the wide, counterclockwise rotary.
"Long story," he said, pulling his sleeve back down.
"I imagine it would have to be." She gave him a quick smile and exited the rotary, heading due north, away from the city center. Barely making two green lights, she reached the third intersection and took a hard right onto Boulevard Malesherbes. They'd left the rich, tree-lined streets of the diplomatic neighborhood and plunged into a darker industrial neighborhood. Sophie took a quick left, and a moment later, Langdon realized where they were.
Gare Saint-Lazare.
Ahead of them, the glass-roofed train terminal resembled the awkward offspring of an airplane 

hangar and a greenhouse. European train stations never slept. Even at this hour, a half-dozen taxis idled near the main entrance. Vendors manned carts of sandwiches and mineral water while grungy kids in backpacks emerged from the station rubbing their eyes, looking around as if trying to remember what city they were in now. Up ahead on the street, a couple of city policemen stood on the curb giving directions to some confused tourists.
Sophie pulled her SmartCar in behind the line of taxis and parked in a red zone despite plenty of legal parking across the street. Before Langdon could ask what was going on, she was out of the car. She hurried to the window of the taxi in front of them and began speaking to the driver.
As Langdon got out of the SmartCar, he saw Sophie hand the taxi driver a big wad of cash. The taxi driver nodded and then, to Langdon's bewilderment, sped off without them.
"What happened?" Langdon demanded, joining Sophie on the curb as the taxi disappeared.
Sophie was already heading for the train station entrance. "Come on. We're buying two tickets on the next train out of Paris."
Langdon hurried along beside her. What had begun as a one-mile dash to the U.S. Embassy had now become a full-fledged evacuation from Paris. Langdon was liking this idea less and less. 
CHAPTER 34
The driver who collected Bishop Aringarosa from Leonardo da Vinci International Airport pulled up in a small, unimpressive black Fiat sedan. Aringarosa recalled a day when all Vatican transports were big luxury cars that sported grille-plate medallions and flags emblazoned with the seal of the Holy See. Those days are gone. Vatican cars were now less ostentatious and almost always unmarked. The Vatican claimed this was to cut costs to better serve their dioceses, but Aringarosa suspected it was more of a security measure. The world had gone mad, and in many parts of Europe, advertising your love of Jesus Christ was like painting a bull's-eye on the roof of your car.
Bundling his black cassock around himself, Aringarosa climbed into the back seat and settled in for the long drive to Castel Gandolfo. It would be the same ride he had taken five months ago.
Last year's trip to Rome, he sighed. The longest night of my life.
Five months ago, the Vatican had phoned to request Aringarosa's immediate presence in Rome. They offered no explanation. Your tickets are at the airport. The Holy See worked hard to retain a veil of mystery, even for its highest clergy.
The mysterious summons, Aringarosa suspected, was probably a photo opportunity for the Pope 

and other Vatican officials to piggyback on Opus Dei's recent public success—the completion of their World Headquarters in New York City. Architectural Digest had called Opus Dei's building "a shining beacon of Catholicism sublimely integrated with the modern landscape," and lately the Vatican seemed to be drawn to anything and everything that included the word "modern."
Aringarosa had no choice but to accept the invitation, albeit reluctantly. Not a fan of the current papal administration, Aringarosa, like most conservative clergy, had watched with grave concern as the new Pope settled into his first year in office. An unprecedented liberal, His Holiness had secured the papacy through one of the most controversial and unusual conclaves in Vatican history. Now, rather than being humbled by his unexpected rise to power, the Holy Father had wasted no time flexing all the muscle associated with the highest office in Christendom. Drawing on an unsettling tide of liberal support within the College of Cardinals, the Pope was now declaring his papal mission to be "rejuvenation of Vatican doctrine and updating Catholicism into the third millennium."
The translation, Aringarosa feared, was that the man was actually arrogant enough to think he could rewrite God's laws and win back the hearts of those who felt the demands of true Catholicism had become too inconvenient in a modern world.
Aringarosa had been using all of his political sway—substantial considering the size of the Opus Dei constituency and their bankroll—to persuade the Pope and his advisers that softening the Church's laws was not only faithless and cowardly, but political suicide. He reminded them that previous tempering of Church law—the Vatican II fiasco—had left a devastating legacy: Church attendance was now lower than ever, donations were drying up, and there were not even enough Catholic priests to preside over their churches.
People need structure and direction from the Church, Aringarosa insisted, not coddling and indulgence!
On that night, months ago, as the Fiat had left the airport, Aringarosa was surprised to find himself heading not toward Vatican City but rather eastward up a sinuous mountain road. "Where are we going?" he had demanded of his driver.
"Alban Hills," the man replied. "Your meeting is at Castel Gandolfo."
The Pope's summer residence? Aringarosa had never been, nor had he ever desired to see it. In addition to being the Pope's summer vacation home, the sixteenth-century citadel housed the Specula Vaticana—the Vatican Observatory—one of the most advanced astronomical observatories in Europe. Aringarosa had never been comfortable with the Vatican's historical need to dabble in science. What was the rationale for fusing science and faith? Unbiased science could not possibly be performed by a man who possessed faith in God. Nor did faith have any need for physical confirmation of its beliefs.

Nonetheless, there it is, he thought as Castel Gandolfo came into view, rising against a star-filled November sky. From the access road, Gandolfo resembled a great stone monster pondering a suicidal leap. Perched at the very edge of a cliff, the castle leaned out over the cradle of Italian civilization—the valley where the Curiazi and Orazi clans fought long before the founding of Rome.
Even in silhouette, Gandolfo was a sight to behold—an impressive example of tiered, defensive architecture, echoing the potency of this dramatic cliffside setting. Sadly, Aringarosa now saw, the Vatican had ruined the building by constructing two huge aluminum telescope domes atop the roof, leaving this once dignified edifice looking like a proud warrior wearing a couple of party hats.
When Aringarosa got out of the car, a young Jesuit priest hurried out and greeted him. "Bishop, welcome. I am Father Mangano. An astronomer here."
Good for you. Aringarosa grumbled his hello and followed his host into the castle's foyer—a wide-open space whose decor was a graceless blend of Renaissance art and astronomy images. Following his escort up the wide travertine marble staircase, Aringarosa saw signs for conference centers, science lecture halls, and tourist information services. It amazed him to think the Vatican was failing at every turn to provide coherent, stringent guidelines for spiritual growth and yet somehow still found time to give astrophysics lectures to tourists.
"Tell me," Aringarosa said to the young priest, "when did the tail start wagging the dog?"
The priest gave him an odd look. "Sir?"
Aringarosa waved it off, deciding not to launch into that particular offensive again this evening. The Vatican has gone mad. Like a lazy parent who found it easier to acquiesce to the whims of a spoiled child than to stand firm and teach values, the Church just kept softening at every turn, trying to reinvent itself to accommodate a culture gone astray.
The top floor's corridor was wide, lushly appointed, and led in only one direction—toward a huge set of oak doors with a brass sign.
BIBLIOTECA ASTRONOMICA
Aringarosa had heard of this place—the Vatican's Astronomy Library—rumored to contain more than twenty-five thousand volumes, including rare works of Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, Newton, and Secchi. Allegedly, it was also the place in which the Pope's highest officers held private meetings... those meetings they preferred not to hold within the walls of Vatican City.
Approaching the door, Bishop Aringarosa would never have imagined the shocking news he was about to receive inside, or the deadly chain of events it would put into motion. It was not until an hour later, as he staggered from the meeting, that the devastating implications settled in. Six months 

from now! he had thought. God help us! 
Now, seated in the Fiat, Bishop Aringarosa realized his fists were clenched just thinking about that first meeting. He released his grip and forced a slow inhalation, relaxing his muscles.
Everything will be fine, he told himself as the Fiat wound higher into the mountains. Still, he wished his cell phone would ring. Why hasn't the Teacher called me? Silas should have the keystone by now.
Trying to ease his nerves, the bishop meditated on the purple amethyst in his ring. Feeling the textures of the mitre-crozier appliqué and the facets of the diamonds, he reminded himself that this ring was a symbol of power far less than that which he would soon attain. 
CHAPTER 35
The inside of Gare Saint-Lazare looked like every other train station in Europe, a gaping indoor-outdoor cavern dotted with the usual suspects—homeless men holding cardboard signs, collections of bleary-eyed college kids sleeping on backpacks and zoning out to their portable MP3 players, and clusters of blue-clad baggage porters smoking cigarettes.
Sophie raised her eyes to the enormous departure board overhead. The black and white tabs reshuffled, ruffling downward as the information refreshed. When the update was finished, Langdon eyed the offerings. The topmost listing read: LYON—RAPIDE—3:06
"I wish it left sooner," Sophie said, "but Lyon will have to do." Sooner? Langdon checked his watch 2:59 A.M. The train left in seven minutes and they didn't even have tickets yet.
Sophie guided Langdon toward the ticket window and said, "Buy us two tickets with your credit card."
"I thought credit card usage could be traced by—"
"Exactly."
Langdon decided to stop trying to keep ahead of Sophie Neveu. Using his Visa card, he purchased two coach tickets to Lyon and handed them to Sophie.
Sophie guided him out toward the tracks, where a familiar tone chimed overhead and a P.A. announcer gave the final boarding call for Lyon. Sixteen separate tracks spread out before them. In 

the distance to the right, at quay three, the train to Lyon was belching and wheezing in preparation for departure, but Sophie already had her arm through Langdon's and was guiding him in the exact opposite direction. They hurried through a side lobby, past an all-night cafe, and finally out a side door onto a quiet street on the west side of the station.
A lone taxi sat idling by the doorway.
The driver saw Sophie and flicked his lights.
Sophie jumped in the back seat. Langdon got in after her.
As the taxi pulled away from station, Sophie took out their newly purchased train tickets and tore them up.
Langdon sighed. Seventy dollars well spent.
It was not until their taxi had settled into a monotonous northbound hum on Rue de Clichy that Langdon felt they'd actually escaped. Out the window to his right, he could see Montmartre and the beautiful dome of Sacré-Coeur. The image was interrupted by the flash of police lights sailing past them in the opposite direction.
Langdon and Sophie ducked down as the sirens faded.
Sophie had told the cab driver simply to head out of the city, and from her firmly set jaw, Langdon sensed she was trying to figure out their next move.
Langdon examined the cruciform key again, holding it to the window, bringing it close to his eyes in an effort to find any markings on it that might indicate where the key had been made. In the intermittent glow of passing streetlights, he saw no markings except the Priory seal.
"It doesn't make sense," he finally said.
"Which part?"
"That your grandfather would go to so much trouble to give you a key that you wouldn't know what to do with."
"I agree."
"Are you sure he didn't write anything else on the back of the painting?"
"I searched the whole area. This is all there was. This key, wedged behind the painting. I saw the Priory seal, stuck the key in my pocket, then we left."

Langdon frowned, peering now at the blunt end of the triangular shaft. Nothing. Squinting, he brought the key close to his eyes and examined the rim of the head. Nothing there either. "I think this key was cleaned recently."
"Why?"
"It smells like rubbing alcohol."
She turned. "I'm sorry?"
"It smells like somebody polished it with a cleaner." Langdon held the key to his nose and sniffed. "It's stronger on the other side." He flipped it over. "Yes, it's alcohol-based, like it's been buffed with a cleaner or—" Langdon stopped.
"What?"
He angled the key to the light and looked at the smooth surface on the broad arm of the cross. It seemed to shimmer in places... like it was wet. "How well did you look at the back of this key before you put it in your pocket?"
"What? Not well. I was in a hurry."
Langdon turned to her. "Do you still have the black light?"
Sophie reached in her pocket and produced the UV penlight. Langdon took it and switched it on, shining the beam on the back of the key.
The back luminesced instantly. There was writing there. In penmanship that was hurried but legible.
"Well," Langdon said, smiling. "I guess we know what the alcohol smell was." 
Sophie stared in amazement at the purple writing on the back of the key.
24 Rue Haxo 
An address! My grandfather wrote down an address!
"Where is this?" Langdon asked.

Sophie had no idea. Facing front again, she leaned forward and excitedly asked the driver, "Connaissez-vous la Rue Haxo?"
The driver thought a moment and then nodded. He told Sophie it was out near the tennis stadium on the western outskirts of Paris. She asked him to take them there immediately.
"Fastest route is through Bois de Boulogne," the driver told her in French. "Is that okay?"
Sophie frowned. She could think of far less scandalous routes, but tonight she was not going to be picky. "Oui." We can shock the visiting American.
Sophie looked back at the key and wondered what they would possibly find at 24 Rue Haxo. A church? Some kind of Priory headquarters?
Her mind filled again with images of the secret ritual she had witnessed in the basement grotto ten years ago, and she heaved a long sigh. "Robert, I have a lot of things to tell you." She paused, locking eyes with him as the taxi raced westward. "But first I want you to tell me everything you know about this Priory of Sion." 
CHAPTER 36
Outside the Salle des Etats, Bezu Fache was fuming as Louvre warden Grouard explained how Sophie and Langdon had disarmed him. Why didn't you just shoot the blessed painting!
"Captain?" Lieutenant Collet loped toward them from the direction of the command post. "Captain, I just heard. They located Agent Neveu's car."
"Did she make the embassy?"
"No. Train station. Bought two tickets. Train just left."
Fache waved off warden Grouard and led Collet to a nearby alcove, addressing him in hushed tones. "What was the destination?"
"Lyon."
"Probably a decoy." Fache exhaled, formulating a plan. "Okay, alert the next station, have the train stopped and searched, just in case. Leave her car where it is and put plainclothes on watch in case they try to come back to it. Send men to search the streets around the station in case they fled on foot. Are buses running from the station?"

"Not at this hour, sir. Only the taxi queue."
"Good. Question the drivers. See if they saw anything. Then contact the taxi company dispatcher with descriptions. I'm calling Interpol."
Collet looked surprised. "You're putting this on the wire?"
Fache regretted the potential embarrassment, but he saw no other choice.
Close the net fast, and close it tight.
The first hour was critical. Fugitives were predictable the first hour after escape. They always needed the same thing. Travel. Lodging. Cash. The Holy Trinity. Interpol had the power to make all three disappear in the blink of an eye. By broadcast-faxing photos of Langdon and Sophie to Paris travel authorities, hotels, and banks, Interpol would leave no options—no way to leave the city, no place to hide, and no way to withdraw cash without being recognized. Usually, fugitives panicked on the street and did something stupid. Stole a car. Robbed a store. Used a bank card in desperation. Whatever mistake they committed, they quickly made their whereabouts known to local authorities.
"Only Langdon, right?" Collet said. "You're not flagging Sophie Neveu. She's our own agent."
"Of course I'm flagging her!" Fache snapped. "What good is flagging Langdon if she can do all his dirty work? I plan to run Neveu's employment file—friends, family, personal contacts—anyone she might turn to for help. I don't know what she thinks she's doing out there, but it's going to cost her one hell of a lot more than her job!"
"Do you want me on the phones or in the field?"
"Field. Get over to the train station and coordinate the team. You've got the reins, but don't make a move without talking to me."
"Yes, sir." Collet ran out.
Fache felt rigid as he stood in the alcove. Outside the window, the glass pyramid shone, its reflection rippling in the windswept pools. They slipped through my fingers. He told himself to relax.
Even a trained field agent would be lucky to withstand the pressure that Interpol was about to apply.
A female cryptologist and a schoolteacher?

They wouldn't last till dawn. 
CHAPTER 37
The heavily forested park known as the Bois de Boulogne was called many things, but the Parisian cognoscenti knew it as "the Garden of Earthly Delights." The epithet, despite sounding flattering, was quite to the contrary. Anyone who had seen the lurid Bosch painting of the same name understood the jab; the painting, like the forest, was dark and twisted, a purgatory for freaks and fetishists. At night, the forest's winding lanes were lined with hundreds of glistening bodies for hire, earthly delights to satisfy one's deepest unspoken desires—male, female, and everything in between.
As Langdon gathered his thoughts to tell Sophie about the Priory of Sion, their taxi passed through the wooded entrance to the park and began heading west on the cobblestone crossfare. Langdon was having trouble concentrating as a scattering of the park's nocturnal residents were already emerging from the shadows and flaunting their wares in the glare of the headlights. Ahead, two topless teenage girls shot smoldering gazes into the taxi. Beyond them, a well-oiled black man in a G-string turned and flexed his buttocks. Beside him, a gorgeous blond woman lifted her miniskirt to reveal that she was not, in fact, a woman.
Heaven help me! Langdon turned his gaze back inside the cab and took a deep breath.
"Tell me about the Priory of Sion," Sophie said.
Langdon nodded, unable to imagine a less congruous a backdrop for the legend he was about to tell. He wondered where to begin. The brotherhood's history spanned more than a millennium... an astonishing chronicle of secrets, blackmail, betrayal, and even brutal torture at the hands of an angry Pope.
"The Priory of Sion," he began, "was founded in Jerusalem in 1099 by a French king named Godefroi de Bouillon, immediately after he had conquered the city."
Sophie nodded, her eyes riveted on him.
"King Godefroi was allegedly the possessor of a powerful secret—a secret that had been in his family since the time of Christ. Fearing his secret might be lost when he died, he founded a secret brotherhood—the Priory of Sion—and charged them with protecting his secret by quietly passing it on from generation to generation. During their years in Jerusalem, the Priory learned of a stash of hidden documents buried beneath the ruins of Herod's temple, which had been built atop the earlier ruins of Solomon's Temple. These documents, they believed, corroborated Godefroi's powerful secret and were so explosive in nature that the Church would stop at nothing to get them." Sophie 

looked uncertain.
"The Priory vowed that no matter how long it took, these documents must be recovered from the rubble beneath the temple and protected forever, so the truth would never die. In order to retrieve the documents from within the ruins, the Priory created a military arm—a group of nine knights called the Order of the Poor Knights of Christ and the Temple of Solomon." Langdon paused. "More commonly known as the Knights Templar."
Sophie glanced up with a surprised look of recognition. Langdon had lectured often enough on the Knights Templar to know that almost everyone on earth had heard of them, at least abstractedly. For academics, the Templars' history was a precarious world where fact, lore, and misinformation had become so intertwined that extracting a pristine truth was almost impossible. Nowadays, Langdon hesitated even to mention the Knights Templar while lecturing because it invariably led to a barrage of convoluted inquiries into assorted conspiracy theories.
Sophie already looked troubled. "You're saying the Knights Templar were founded by the Priory of Sion to retrieve a collection of secret documents? I thought the Templars were created to protect the Holy Land."
"A common misconception. The idea of protection of pilgrims was the guise under which the Templars ran their mission. Their true goal in the Holy Land was to retrieve the documents from beneath the ruins of the temple."
"And did they find them?"
Langdon grinned. "Nobody knows for sure, but the one thing on which all academics agree is this: The Knights discovered something down there in the ruins... something that made them wealthy and powerful beyond anyone's wildest imagination."
Langdon quickly gave Sophie the standard academic sketch of the accepted Knights Templar history, explaining how the Knights were in the Holy Land during the Second Crusade and told King Baldwin II that they were there to protect Christian pilgrims on the roadways. Although unpaid and sworn to poverty, the Knights told the king they required basic shelter and requested his permission to take up residence in the stables under the ruins of the temple. King Baldwin granted the soldiers' request, and the Knights took up their meager residence inside the devastated shrine.
The odd choice of lodging, Langdon explained, had been anything but random. The Knights believed the documents the Priory sought were buried deep under the ruins—beneath the Holy of Holies, a sacred chamber where God Himself was believed to reside. Literally, the very center of the Jewish faith. For almost a decade, the nine Knights lived in the ruins, excavating in total secrecy through solid rock.
Sophie looked over. "And you said they discovered something?"

"They certainly did," Langdon said, explaining how it had taken nine years, but the Knights had finally found what they had been searching for. They took the treasure from the temple and traveled to Europe, where their influence seemed to solidify overnight.
Nobody was certain whether the Knights had blackmailed the Vatican or whether the Church simply tried to buy the Knights' silence, but Pope Innocent II immediately issued an unprecedented papal bull that afforded the Knights Templar limitless power and declared them "a law unto themselves"—an autonomous army independent of all interference from kings and prelates, both religious and political.
With their new carte blanche from the Vatican, the Knights Templar expanded at a staggering rate, both in numbers and political force, amassing vast estates in over a dozen countries. They began extending credit to bankrupt royals and charging interest in return, thereby establishing modern banking and broadening their wealth and influence still further.
By the 1300s, the Vatican sanction had helped the Knights amass so much power that Pope Clement V decided that something had to be done. Working in concert with France's King Philippe IV, the Pope devised an ingeniously planned sting operation to quash the Templars and seize their treasure, thus taking control of the secrets held over the Vatican. In a military maneuver worthy of the CIA, Pope Clement issued secret sealed orders to be opened simultaneously by his soldiers all across Europe on Friday, October 13 of 1307.
At dawn on the thirteenth, the documents were unsealed and their appalling contents revealed. Clement's letter claimed that God had visited him in a vision and warned him that the Knights Templar were heretics guilty of devil worship, homosexuality, defiling the cross, sodomy, and other blasphemous behavior. Pope Clement had been asked by God to cleanse the earth by rounding up all the Knights and torturing them until they confessed their crimes against God. Clement's Machiavellian operation came off with clockwork precision. On that day, countless Knights were captured, tortured mercilessly, and finally burned at the stake as heretics. Echoes of the tragedy still resonated in modern culture; to this day, Friday the thirteenth was considered unlucky.
Sophie looked confused. "The Knights Templar were obliterated? I thought fraternities of Templars still exist today?"
"They do, under a variety of names. Despite Clement's false charges and best efforts to eradicate them, the Knights had powerful allies, and some managed to escape the Vatican purges. The Templars' potent treasure trove of documents, which had apparently been their source of power, was Clement's true objective, but it slipped through his fingers. The documents had long since been entrusted to the Templars' shadowy architects, the Priory of Sion, whose veil of secrecy had kept them safely out of range of the Vatican's onslaught. As the Vatican closed in, the Priory smuggled their documents from a Paris preceptory by night onto Templar ships in La Rochelle."

"Where did the documents go?"
Langdon shrugged. "That mystery's answer is known only to the Priory of Sion. Because the documents remain the source of constant investigation and speculation even today, they are believed to have been moved and rehidden several times. Current speculation places the documents somewhere in the United Kingdom."
Sophie looked uneasy.
"For a thousand years," Langdon continued, "legends of this secret have been passed on. The entire collection of documents, its power, and the secret it reveals have become known by a single name—Sangreal. Hundreds of books have been written about it, and few mysteries have caused as much interest among historians as the Sangreal."
"The Sangreal? Does the word have anything to do with the French word sang or Spanish sangre—meaning 'blood'?"
Langdon nodded. Blood was the backbone of the Sangreal, and yet not in the way Sophie probably imagined. "The legend is complicated, but the important thing to remember is that the Priory guards the proof, and is purportedly awaiting the right moment in history to reveal the truth."
"What truth? What secret could possibly be that powerful?"
Langdon took a deep breath and gazed out at the underbelly of Paris leering in the shadows. "Sophie, the word Sangreal is an ancient word. It has evolved over the years into another term... a more modern name." He paused. "When I tell you its modern name, you'll realize you already know a lot about it. In fact, almost everyone on earth has heard the story of the Sangreal."
Sophie looked skeptical. "I've never heard of it."
"Sure you have." Langdon smiled. "You're just used to hearing it called by the name 'Holy Grail.' " 
CHAPTER 38
Sophie scrutinized Langdon in the back of the taxi. He's joking. "The Holy Grail?"
Langdon nodded, his expression serious. "Holy Grail is the literal meaning of Sangreal. The phrase derives from the French Sangraal, which evolved to Sangreal, and was eventually split into two words, San Greal."

Holy Grail. Sophie was surprised she had not spotted the linguistic ties immediately. Even so, Langdon's claim still made no sense to her. "I thought the Holy Grail was a cup. You just told me the Sangreal is a collection of documents that reveals some dark secret."
"Yes, but the Sangreal documents are only half of the Holy Grail treasure. They are buried with the Grail itself... and reveal its true meaning. The documents gave the Knights Templar so much power because the pages revealed the true nature of the Grail."
The true nature of the Grail? Sophie felt even more lost now. The Holy Grail, she had thought, was the cup that Jesus drank from at the Last Supper and with which Joseph of Arimathea later caught His blood at the crucifixion. "The Holy Grail is the Cup of Christ," she said. "How much simpler could it be?"
"Sophie," Langdon whispered, leaning toward her now, "according to the Priory of Sion, the Holy Grail is not a cup at all. They claim the Grail legend—that of a chalice—is actually an ingeniously conceived allegory. That is, that the Grail story uses the chalice as a metaphor for something else, something far more powerful." He paused. "Something that fits perfectly with everything your grandfather has been trying to tell us tonight, including all his symbologic references to the sacred feminine."
Still unsure, Sophie sensed in Langdon's patient smile that he empathized with her confusion, and yet his eyes remained earnest. "But if the Holy Grail is not a cup," she asked, "what is it?"
Langdon had known this question was coming, and yet he still felt uncertain exactly how to tell her. If he did not present the answer in the proper historical background, Sophie would be left with a vacant air of bewilderment—the exact expression Langdon had seen on his own editor's face a few months ago after Langdon handed him a draft of the manuscript he was working on.
"This manuscript claims what?" his editor had choked, setting down his wineglass and staring across his half-eaten power lunch. "You can't be serious."
"Serious enough to have spent a year researching it."
Prominent New York editor Jonas Faukman tugged nervously at his goatee. Faukman no doubt had heard some wild book ideas in his illustrious career, but this one seemed to have left the man flabbergasted.
"Robert," Faukman finally said, "don't get me wrong. I love your work, and we've had a great run together. But if I agree to publish an idea like this, I'll have people picketing outside my office for months. Besides, it will kill your reputation. You're a Harvard historian, for God's sake, not a pop schlockmeister looking for a quick buck. Where could you possibly find enough credible evidence to support a theory like this?"

With a quiet smile Langdon pulled a piece of paper from the pocket of his tweed coat and handed it to Faukman. The page listed a bibliography of over fifty titles—books by well-known historians, some contemporary, some centuries old—many of them academic bestsellers. All the book titles suggested the same premise Langdon had just proposed. As Faukman read down the list, he looked like a man who had just discovered the earth was actually flat. "I know some of these authors. They're... real historians!"
Langdon grinned. "As you can see, Jonas, this is not only my theory. It's been around for a long time. I'm simply building on it. No book has yet explored the legend of the Holy Grail from a symbologic angle. The iconographic evidence I'm finding to support the theory is, well, staggeringly persuasive."
Faukman was still staring at the list. "My God, one of these books was written by Sir Leigh Teabing—a British Royal Historian."
"Teabing has spent much of his life studying the Holy Grail. I've met with him. He was actually a big part of my inspiration. He's a believer, Jonas, along with all of the others on that list."
"You're telling me all of these historians actually believe..." Faukman swallowed, apparently unable to say the words.
Langdon grinned again. "The Holy Grail is arguably the most sought-after treasure in human history. The Grail has spawned legends, wars, and lifelong quests. Does it make sense that it is merely a cup? If so, then certainly other relics should generate similar or greater interest—the Crown of Thorns, the True Cross of the Crucifixion, the Titulus—and yet, they do not. Throughout history, the Holy Grail has been the most special." Langdon grinned. "Now you know why."
Faukman was still shaking his head. "But with all these books written about it, why isn't this theory more widely known?"
"These books can't possibly compete with centuries of established history, especially when that history is endorsed by the ultimate bestseller of all time."
Faukman's eyes went wide. "Don't tell me Harry Potter is actually about the Holy Grail."
"I was referring to the Bible."
Faukman cringed. "I knew that." 
"Laissez-le!" Sophie's shouts cut the air inside the taxi. "Put it down!"

Langdon jumped as Sophie leaned forward over the seat and yelled at the taxi driver. Langdon could see the driver was clutching his radio mouthpiece and speaking into it.
Sophie turned now and plunged her hand into the pocket of Langdon's tweed jacket. Before Langdon knew what had happened, she had yanked out the pistol, swung it around, and was pressing it to the back of the driver's head. The driver instantly dropped his radio, raising his one free hand overhead.
"Sophie!" Langdon choked. "What the hell—"
"Arrêtez!" Sophie commanded the driver.
Trembling, the driver obeyed, stopping the car and putting it in park.
It was then that Langdon heard the metallic voice of the taxi company's dispatcher coming from the dashboard. "...qui s'appette Agent Sophie Neveu..." the radio crackled. "Et un Américain, Robert Langdon..."
Langdon's muscles turned rigid. They found us already?
"Descendez," Sophie demanded.
The trembling driver kept his arms over his head as he got out of his taxi and took several steps backward.
Sophie had rolled down her window and now aimed the gun outside at the bewildered cabbie. "Robert," she said quietly, "take the wheel. You're driving."
Langdon was not about to argue with a woman wielding a gun. He climbed out of the car and jumped back in behind the wheel. The driver was yelling curses, his arms still raised over his head.
"Robert," Sophie said from the back seat, "I trust you've seen enough of our magic forest?"
He nodded. Plenty.
"Good. Drive us out of here."
Langdon looked down at the car's controls and hesitated. Shit. He groped for the stick shift and clutch. "Sophie? Maybe you—"
"Go!" she yelled.
Outside, several hookers were walking over to see what was going on. One woman was placing a 

call on her cell phone. Langdon depressed the clutch and jostled the stick into what he hoped was first gear. He touched the accelerator, testing the gas.
Langdon popped the clutch. The tires howled as the taxi leapt forward, fishtailing wildly and sending the gathering crowd diving for cover. The woman with the cell phone leapt into the woods, only narrowly avoiding being run down.
"Doucement!" Sophie said, as the car lurched down the road. "What are you doing?"
"I tried to warn you," he shouted over the sound of gnashing gears. "I drive an automatic!" 
CHAPTER 39
Although the spartan room in the brownstone on Rue La Bruyère had witnessed a lot of suffering, Silas doubted anything could match the anguish now gripping his pale body. I was deceived. Everything is lost.
Silas had been tricked. The brothers had lied, choosing death instead of revealing their true secret. Silas did not have the strength to call the Teacher. Not only had Silas killed the only four people who knew where the keystone was hidden, he had killed a nun inside Saint-Sulpice. She was working against God! She scorned the work of Opus Dei!
A crime of impulse, the woman's death complicated matters greatly. Bishop Aringarosa had placed the phone call that got Silas into Saint-Sulpice; what would the abbé think when he discovered the nun was dead? Although Silas had placed her back in her bed, the wound on her head was obvious. Silas had attempted to replace the broken tiles in the floor, but that damage too was obvious. They would know someone had been there.
Silas had planned to hide within Opus Dei when his task here was complete. Bishop Aringarosa will protect me. Silas could imagine no more blissful existence than a life of meditation and prayer deep within the walls of Opus Dei's headquarters in New York City. He would never again set foot outside. Everything he needed was within that sanctuary. Nobody will miss me. Unfortunately, Silas knew, a prominent man like Bishop Aringarosa could not disappear so easily.
I have endangered the bishop. Silas gazed blankly at the floor and pondered taking his own life. After all, it had been Aringarosa who gave Silas life in the first place... in that small rectory in Spain, educating him, giving him purpose.
"My friend," Aringarosa had told him, "you were born an albino. Do not let others shame you for this. Do you not understand how special this makes you? Were you not aware that Noah himself was an albino?"

"Noah of the Ark?" Silas had never heard this.
Aringarosa was smiling. "Indeed, Noah of the Ark. An albino. Like you, he had skin white like an angel. Consider this. Noah saved all of life on the planet. You are destined for great things, Silas. The Lord has freed you for a reason. You have your calling. The Lord needs your help to do His work."
Over time, Silas learned to see himself in a new light. I am pure. White. Beautiful. Like an angel.
At the moment, though, in his room at the residence hall, it was his father's disappointed voice that whispered to him from the past.
Tu es un désastre. Un spectre.
Kneeling on the wooden floor, Silas prayed for forgiveness. Then, stripping off his robe, he reached again for the Discipline. 
CHAPTER 40
Struggling with the gear shift, Langdon managed to maneuver the hijacked taxi to the far side of the Bois de Boulogne while stalling only twice. Unfortunately, the inherent humor in the situation was overshadowed by the taxi dispatcher repeatedly hailing their cab over the radio.
"Voiture cinq-six-trois. Où êtes-vous? Répondez!"
When Langdon reached the exit of the park, he swallowed his machismo and jammed on the brakes. "You'd better drive."
Sophie looked relieved as she jumped behind the wheel. Within seconds she had the car humming smoothly westward along Allée de Longchamp, leaving the Garden of Earthly Delights behind.
"Which way is Rue Haxo?" Langdon asked, watching Sophie edge the speedometer over a hundred kilometers an hour.
Sophie's eyes remained focused on the road. "The cab driver said it's adjacent to the Roland Garros tennis stadium. I know that area."
Langdon pulled the heavy key from his pocket again, feeling the weight in his palm. He sensed it was an object of enormous consequence. Quite possibly the key to his own freedom.

Earlier, while telling Sophie about the Knights Templar, Langdon had realized that this key, in addition to having the Priory seal embossed on it, possessed a more subtle tie to the Priory of Sion. The equal-armed cruciform was symbolic of balance and harmony but also of the Knights Templar. Everyone had seen the paintings of Knights Templar wearing white tunics emblazoned with red equal-armed crosses. Granted, the arms of the Templar cross were slightly flared at the ends, but they were still of equal length.
A square cross. Just like the one on this key.
Langdon felt his imagination starting to run wild as he fantasized about what they might find. The Holy Grail. He almost laughed out loud at the absurdity of it. The Grail was believed to be somewhere in England, buried in a hidden chamber beneath one of the many Templar churches, where it had been hidden since at least 1500.
The era of Grand Master Da Vinci.
The Priory, in order to keep their powerful documents safe, had been forced to move them many times in the early centuries. Historians now suspected as many as six different Grail relocations since its arrival in Europe from Jerusalem. The last Grail "sighting" had been in 1447 when numerous eyewitnesses described a fire that had broken out and almost engulfed the documents before they were carried to safety in four huge chests that each required six men to carry. After that, nobody claimed to see the Grail ever again. All that remained were occasional whisperings that it was hidden in Great Britain, the land of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table.
Wherever it was, two important facts remained:
Leonardo knew where the Grail resided during his lifetime.
That hiding place had probably not changed to this day.
For this reason, Grail enthusiasts still pored over Da Vinci's art and diaries in hopes of unearthing a hidden clue as to the Grail's current location. Some claimed the mountainous backdrop in Madonna of the Rocks matched the topography of a series of cave-ridden hills in Scotland. Others insisted that the suspicious placement of disciples in The Last Supper was some kind of code. Still others claimed that X rays of the Mona Lisa revealed she originally had been painted wearing a lapis lazuli pendant of Isis—a detail Da Vinci purportedly later decided to paint over. Langdon had never seen any evidence of the pendant, nor could he imagine how it could possibly reveal the Holy Grail, and yet Grail aficionados still discussed it ad nauseum on Internet bulletin boards and worldwide-web chat rooms.
Everyone loves a conspiracy.
And the conspiracies kept coming. Most recently, of course, had been the earthshaking discovery 

that Da Vinci's famed Adoration of the Magi was hiding a dark secret beneath its layers of paint. Italian art diagnostician Maurizio Seracini had unveiled the unsettling truth, which the New York Times Magazine carried prominently in a story titled "The Leonardo Cover-Up."
Seracini had revealed beyond any doubt that while the Adoration's gray-green sketched underdrawing was indeed Da Vinci's work, the painting itself was not. The truth was that some anonymous painter had filled in Da Vinci's sketch like a paint-by-numbers years after Da Vinci's death. Far more troubling, however, was what lay beneath the impostor's paint. Photographs taken with infrared reflectography and X ray suggested that this rogue painter, while filling in Da Vinci's sketched study, had made suspicious departures from the underdrawing... as if to subvert Da Vinci's true intention. Whatever the true nature of the underdrawing, it had yet to be made public. Even so, embarrassed officials at Florence's Uffizi Gallery immediately banished the painting to a warehouse across the street. Visitors at the gallery's Leonardo Room now found a misleading and unapologetic plaque where the Adoration once hung.
THIS WORK IS UNDERGOING
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS IN PREPARATION
FOR RESTORATION. 
In the bizarre underworld of modern Grail seekers, Leonardo da Vinci remained the quest's great enigma. His artwork seemed bursting to tell a secret, and yet whatever it was remained hidden, perhaps beneath a layer of paint, perhaps enciphered in plain view, or perhaps nowhere at all. Maybe Da Vinci's plethora of tantalizing clues was nothing but an empty promise left behind to frustrate the curious and bring a smirk to the face of his knowing Mona Lisa.
"Is it possible," Sophie asked, drawing Langdon back, "that the key you're holding unlocks the hiding place of the Holy Grail?"
Langdon's laugh sounded forced, even to him. "I really can't imagine. Besides, the Grail is believed to be hidden in the United Kingdom somewhere, not France." He gave her the quick history.
"But the Grail seems the only rational conclusion," she insisted. "We have an extremely secure key, stamped with the Priory of Sion seal, delivered to us by a member of the Priory of Sion—a brotherhood which, you just told me, are guardians of the Holy Grail."
Langdon knew her contention was logical, and yet intuitively he could not possibly accept it. Rumors existed that the Priory had vowed someday to bring the Grail back to France to a final resting place, but certainly no historical evidence existed to suggest that this indeed had happened. Even if the Priory had managed to bring the Grail back to France, the address 24 Rue Haxo near a tennis stadium hardly sounded like a noble final resting place. "Sophie, I really don't see how this key could have anything to do with the Grail."

"Because the Grail is supposed to be in England?"
"Not only that. The location of the Holy Grail is one of the best kept secrets in history. Priory members wait decades proving themselves trustworthy before being elevated to the highest echelons of the fraternity and learning where the Grail is. That secret is protected by an intricate system of compartmentalized knowledge, and although the Priory brotherhood is very large, only four members at any given time know where the Grail is hidden—the Grand Master and his three sénéchaux. The probability of your grandfather being one of those four top people is very slim."
My grandfather was one of them, Sophie thought, pressing down on the accelerator. She had an image stamped in her memory that confirmed her grandfather's status within the brotherhood beyond any doubt.
"And even if your grandfather were in the upper echelon, he would never be allowed to reveal anything to anyone outside the brotherhood. It is inconceivable that he would bring you into the inner circle."
I've already been there, Sophie thought, picturing the ritual in the basement. She wondered if this were the moment to tell Langdon what she had witnessed that night in the Normandy château. For ten years now, simple shame had kept her from telling a soul. Just thinking about it, she shuddered. Sirens howled somewhere in the distance, and she felt a thickening shroud of fatigue settling over her.
"There!" Langdon said, feeling excited to see the huge complex of the Roland Garros tennis stadium looming ahead.
Sophie snaked her way toward the stadium. After several passes, they located the intersection of Rue Haxo and turned onto it, driving in the direction of the lower numbers. The road became more industrial, lined with businesses.
We need number twenty-four, Langdon told himself, realizing he was secretly scanning the horizon for the spires of a church. Don't be ridiculous. A forgotten Templar church in this neighborhood?
"There it is," Sophie exclaimed, pointing.
Langdon's eyes followed to the structure ahead.
What in the world?
The building was modern. A squat citadel with a giant, neon equal-armed cross emblazoned atop its facade. Beneath the cross were the words:
DEPOSITORY BANK OF ZURICH

Langdon was thankful not to have shared his Templar church hopes with Sophie. A career hazard of symbologists was a tendency to extract hidden meaning from situations that had none. In this case, Langdon had entirely forgotten that the peaceful, equal-armed cross had been adopted as the perfect symbol for the flag of neutral Switzerland.
At least the mystery was solved.
Sophie and Langdon were holding the key to a Swiss bank deposit box. 
CHAPTER 41
Outside Castel Gandolfo, an updraft of mountain air gushed over the top of the cliff and across the high bluff, sending a chill through Bishop Aringarosa as he stepped from the Fiat. I should have worn more than this cassock, he thought, fighting the reflex to shiver. The last thing he needed to appear tonight was weak or fearful.
The castle was dark save the windows at the very top of the building, which glowed ominously. The library, Aringarosa thought. They are awake and waiting. He ducked his head against the wind and continued on without so much as a glance toward the observatory domes.
The priest who greeted him at the door looked sleepy. He was the same priest who had greeted Aringarosa five months ago, albeit tonight he did so with much less hospitality. "We were worried about you, Bishop," the priest said, checking his watch and looking more perturbed than worried.
"My apologies. Airlines are so unreliable these days."
The priest mumbled something inaudible and then said, "They are waiting upstairs. I will escort you up."
The library was a vast square room with dark wood from floor to ceiling. On all sides, towering bookcases burgeoned with volumes. The floor was amber marble with black basalt trim, a handsome reminder that this building had once been a palace.
"Welcome, Bishop," a man's voice said from across the room.
Aringarosa tried to see who had spoken, but the lights were ridiculously low—much lower than they had been on his first visit, when everything was ablaze. The night of stark awakening. Tonight, these men sat in the shadows, as if they were somehow ashamed of what was about to transpire.

Aringarosa entered slowly, regally even. He could see the shapes of three men at a long table on the far side of the room. The silhouette of the man in the middle was immediately recognizable—the obese Secretariat Vaticana, overlord of all legal matters within Vatican City. The other two were high-ranking Italian cardinals.
Aringarosa crossed the library toward them. "My humble apologies for the hour. We're on different time zones. You must be tired."
"Not at all," the secretariat said, his hands folded on his enormous belly. "We are grateful you have come so far. The least we can do is be awake to meet you. Can we offer you some coffee or refreshments?"
"I'd prefer we don't pretend this is a social visit. I have another plane to catch. Shall we get to business?"
"Of course," the secretariat said. "You have acted more quickly than we imagined."
"Have I?"
"You still have a month."
"You made your concerns known five months ago," Aringarosa said. "Why should I wait?"
"Indeed. We are very pleased with your expediency."
Aringarosa's eyes traveled the length of the long table to a large black briefcase. "Is that what I requested?"
"It is." The secretariat sounded uneasy. "Although, I must admit, we are concerned with the request. It seems quite..."
"Dangerous," one of the cardinals finished. "Are you certain we cannot wire it to you somewhere? The sum is exorbitant."
Freedom is expensive. "I have no concerns for my own safety. God is with me."
The men actually looked doubtful.
"The funds are exactly as I requested?"
The secretariat nodded. "Large-denomination bearer bonds drawn on the Vatican Bank. Negotiable as cash anywhere in the world."

Aringarosa walked to the end of the table and opened the briefcase. Inside were two thick stacks of bonds, each embossed with the Vatican seal and the title PORTATORE, making the bonds redeemable to whoever was holding them.
The secretariat looked tense. "I must say, Bishop, all of us would feel less apprehensive if these funds were in cash."
I could not lift that much cash, Aringarosa thought, closing the case. "Bonds are negotiable as cash. You said so yourself."
The cardinals exchanged uneasy looks, and finally one said, "Yes, but these bonds are traceable directly to the Vatican Bank."
Aringarosa smiled inwardly. That was precisely the reason the Teacher suggested Aringarosa get the money in Vatican Bank bonds. It served as insurance. We are all in this together now. "This is a perfectly legal transaction," Aringarosa defended. "Opus Dei is a personal prelature of Vatican City, and His Holiness can disperse monies however he sees fit. No law has been broken here."
"True, and yet..." The secretariat leaned forward and his chair creaked under the burden. "We have no knowledge of what you intend to do with these funds, and if it is in any way illegal..."
"Considering what you are asking of me," Aringarosa countered, "what I do with this money is not your concern."
There was a long silence.
They know I'm right, Aringarosa thought. "Now, I imagine you have something for me to sign?"
They all jumped, eagerly pushing the paper toward him, as if they wished he would simply leave.
Aringarosa eyed the sheet before him. It bore the papal seal. "This is identical to the copy you sent me?"
"Exactly."
Aringarosa was surprised how little emotion he felt as he signed the document. The three men present, however, seemed to sigh in relief.
"Thank you, Bishop," the secretariat said. "Your service to the Church will never be forgotten."
Aringarosa picked up the briefcase, sensing promise and authority in its weight. The four men looked at one another for a moment as if there were something more to say, but apparently there was not. Aringarosa turned and headed for the door.

"Bishop?" one of the cardinals called out as Aringarosa reached the threshold.
Aringarosa paused, turning. "Yes?"
"Where will you go from here?"
Aringarosa sensed the query was more spiritual than geographical, and yet he had no intention of discussing morality at this hour. "Paris," he said, and walked out the door. 
CHAPTER 42
The Depository Bank of Zurich was a twenty-four-hour Geldschrank bank offering the full modern array of anonymous services in the tradition of the Swiss numbered account. Maintaining offices in Zurich, Kuala Lumpur, New York, and Paris, the bank had expanded its services in recent years to offer anonymous computer source code escrow services and faceless digitized backup.
The bread and butter of its operation was by far its oldest and simplest offering—the anonyme Lager—blind drop services, otherwise known as anonymous safe-deposit boxes. Clients wishing to store anything from stock certificates to valuable paintings could deposit their belongings anonymously, through a series of high-tech veils of privacy, withdrawing items at any time, also in total anonymity.
As Sophie pulled the taxi to a stop in front of their destination, Langdon gazed out at the building's uncompromising architecture and sensed the Depository Bank of Zurich was a firm with little sense of humor. The building was a windowless rectangle that seemed to be forged entirely of dull steel. Resembling an enormous metal brick, the edifice sat back from the road with a fifteen-foot-tall, neon, equilateral cross glowing over its facade.
Switzerland's reputation for secrecy in banking had become one of the country's most lucrative exports. Facilities like this had become controversial in the art community because they provided a perfect place for art thieves to hide stolen goods, for years if necessary, until the heat was off. Because deposits were protected from police inspection by privacy laws and were attached to numbered accounts rather than people's names, thieves could rest easily knowing their stolen goods were safe and could never be traced to them.
Sophie stopped the taxi at an imposing gate that blocked the bank's driveway—a cement-lined ramp that descended beneath the building. A video camera overhead was aimed directly at them, and Langdon had the feeling that this camera, unlike those at the Louvre, was authentic.
Sophie rolled down the window and surveyed the electronic podium on the driver's side. An LCD 

screen provided directions in seven languages. Topping the list was English.
INSERT KEY. 
Sophie took the gold laser-pocked key from her pocket and turned her attention back to the podium. Below the screen was a triangular hole.
"Something tells me it will fit," Langdon said.
Sophie aligned the key's triangular shaft with the hole and inserted it, sliding it in until the entire shaft had disappeared. This key apparently required no turning. Instantly, the gate began to swing open. Sophie took her foot off the brake and coasted down to a second gate and podium. Behind her, the first gate closed, trapping them like a ship in a lock.
Langdon disliked the constricted sensation. Let's hope this second gate works too.
This second podium bore familiar directions.
INSERT KEY. 
When Sophie inserted the key, the second gate immediately opened. Moments later they were winding down the ramp into the belly of the structure.
The private garage was small and dim, with spaces for about a dozen cars. At the far end, Langdon spied the building's main entrance. A red carpet stretched across the cement floor, welcoming visitors to a huge door that appeared to be forged of solid metal.
Talk about mixed messages, Langdon thought. Welcome and keep out.
Sophie pulled the taxi into a parking space near the entrance and killed the engine. "You'd better leave the gun here."
With pleasure, Langdon thought, sliding the pistol under the seat.
Sophie and Langdon got out and walked up the red carpet toward the slab of steel. The door had no handle, but on the wall beside it was another triangular keyhole. No directions were posted this time.
"Keeps out the slow learners," Langdon said.
Sophie laughed, looking nervous. "Here we go." She stuck the key in the hole, and the door swung 

inward with a low hum. Exchanging glances, Sophie and Langdon entered. The door shut with a thud behind them.
The foyer of the Depository Bank of Zurich employed as imposing a decor as any Langdon had ever seen. Where most banks were content with the usual polished marble and granite, this one had opted for wall-to-wall metal and rivets.
Who's their decorator? Langdon wondered. Allied Steel?
Sophie looked equally intimidated as her eyes scanned the lobby.
The gray metal was everywhere—the floor, walls, counters, doors, even the lobby chairs appeared to be fashioned of molded iron. Nonetheless, the effect was impressive. The message was clear: You are walking into a vault.
A large man behind the counter glanced up as they entered. He turned off the small television he was watching and greeted them with a pleasant smile. Despite his enormous muscles and visible sidearm, his diction chimed with the polished courtesy of a Swiss bellhop.
"Bonsoir," he said. "How may I help you?"
The dual-language greeting was the newest hospitality trick of the European host. It presumed nothing and opened the door for the guest to reply in whichever language was more comfortable.
Sophie replied with neither. She simply laid the gold key on the counter in front of the man.
The man glanced down and immediately stood straighter. "Of course. Your elevator is at the end of the hall. I will alert someone that you are on your way."
Sophie nodded and took her key back. "Which floor?"
The man gave her an odd look. "Your key instructs the elevator which floor."
She smiled. "Ah, yes." 
The guard watched as the two newcomers made their way to the elevators, inserted their key, boarded the lift, and disappeared. As soon as the door had closed, he grabbed the phone. He was not calling to alert anyone of their arrival; there was no need for that. A vault greeter already had been alerted automatically when the client's key was inserted outside in the entry gate.
Instead, the guard was calling the bank's night manager. As the line rang, the guard switched the 

television back on and stared at it. The news story he had been watching was just ending. It didn't matter. He got another look at the two faces on the television.
The manager answered. "Oui?"
"We have a situation down here."
"What's happening?" the manager demanded.
"The French police are tracking two fugitives tonight."
"So?"
"Both of them just walked into our bank."
The manager cursed quietly. "Okay. I'll contact Monsieur Vernet immediately."
The guard then hung up and placed a second call. This one to Interpol. 
Langdon was surprised to feel the elevator dropping rather than climbing. He had no idea how many floors they had descended beneath the Depository Bank of Zurich before the door finally opened. He didn't care. He was happy to be out of the elevator.
Displaying impressive alacrity, a host was already standing there to greet them. He was elderly and pleasant, wearing a neatly pressed flannel suit that made him look oddly out of place—an old-world banker in a high-tech world.
"Bonsoir," the man said. "Good evening. Would you be so kind as to follow me, s'il vous plait?" Without waiting for a response, he spun on his heel and strode briskly down a narrow metal corridor.
Langdon walked with Sophie down a series of corridors, past several large rooms filled with blinking mainframe computers.
"Voici," their host said, arriving at a steel door and opening it for them. "Here you are."
Langdon and Sophie stepped into another world. The small room before them looked like a lavish sitting room at a fine hotel. Gone were the metal and rivets, replaced with oriental carpets, dark oak furniture, and cushioned chairs. On the broad desk in the middle of the room, two crystal glasses sat beside an opened bottle of Perrier, its bubbles still fizzing. A pewter pot of coffee steamed beside it.

Clockwork, Langdon thought. Leave it to the Swiss.
The man gave a perceptive smile. "I sense this is your first visit to us?"
Sophie hesitated and then nodded.
"Understood. Keys are often passed on as inheritance, and our first-time users are invariably uncertain of the protocol." He motioned to the table of drinks. "This room is yours as long as you care to use it."
"You say keys are sometimes inherited?" Sophie asked.
"Indeed. Your key is like a Swiss numbered account, which are often willed through generations. On our gold accounts, the shortest safety-deposit box lease is fifty years. Paid in advance. So we see plenty of family turnover."
Langdon stared. "Did you say fifty years?"
"At a minimum," their host replied. "Of course, you can purchase much longer leases, but barring further arrangements, if there is no activity on an account for fifty years, the contents of that safe-deposit box are automatically destroyed. Shall I run through the process of accessing your box?"
Sophie nodded. "Please."
Their host swept an arm across the luxurious salon. "This is your private viewing room. Once I leave the room, you may spend all the time you need in here to review and modify the contents of your safe-deposit box, which arrives... over here." He walked them to the far wall where a wide conveyor belt entered the room in a graceful curve, vaguely resembling a baggage claim carousel. "You insert your key in that slot there...." The man pointed to a large electronic podium facing the conveyor belt. The podium had a familiar triangular hole. "Once the computer confirms the markings on your key, you enter your account number, and your safe-deposit box will be retrieved robotically from the vault below for your inspection. When you are finished with your box, you place it back on the conveyor belt, insert your key again, and the process is reversed. Because everything is automated, your privacy is guaranteed, even from the staff of this bank. If you need anything at all, simply press the call button on the table in the center of the room."
Sophie was about to ask a question when a telephone rang. The man looked puzzled and embarrassed. "Excuse me, please." He walked over to the phone, which was sitting on the table beside the coffee and Perrier.
"Oui?" he answered.
His brow furrowed as he listened to the caller. "Oui... oui... d'accord." He hung up, and gave them 

an uneasy smile. "I'm sorry, I must leave you now. Make yourselves at home." He moved quickly toward the door.
"Excuse me," Sophie called. "Could you clarify something before you go? You mentioned that we enter an account number?"
The man paused at the door, looking pale. "But of course. Like most Swiss banks, our safe-deposit boxes are attached to a number, not a name. You have a key and a personal account number known only to you. Your key is only half of your identification. Your personal account number is the other half. Otherwise, if you lost your key, anyone could use it."
Sophie hesitated. "And if my benefactor gave me no account number?"
The banker's heart pounded. Then you obviously have no business here! He gave them a calm smile. "I will ask someone to help you. He will be in shortly."
Leaving, the banker closed the door behind him and twisted a heavy lock, sealing them inside. 
Across town, Collet was standing in the Gare du Nord train terminal when his phone rang.
It was Fache. "Interpol got a tip," he said. "Forget the train. Langdon and Neveu just walked into the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich. I want your men over there right away."
"Any leads yet on what Saunière was trying to tell Agent Neveu and Robert Langdon?"
Fache's tone was cold. "If you arrest them, Lieutenant Collet, then I can ask them personally."
Collet took the hint. "Twenty-four Rue Haxo. Right away, Captain." He hung up and radioed his men. 
CHAPTER 43
André Vernet—president of the Paris branch of the Depository Bank of Zurich—lived in a lavish flat above the bank. Despite his plush accommodations, he had always dreamed of owning a riverside apartment on L'lle Saint-Louis, where he could rub shoulders with the true cognoscenti, rather than here, where he simply met the filthy rich.
When I retire, Vernet told himself, I will fill my cellar with rare Bordeaux, adorn my salon with a 

Fragonard and perhaps a Boucher, and spend my days hunting for antique furniture and rare books in the Quartier Latin.
Tonight, Vernet had been awake only six and a half minutes. Even so, as he hurried through the bank's underground corridor, he looked as if his personal tailor and hairdresser had polished him to a fine sheen. Impeccably dressed in a silk suit, Vernet sprayed some breath spray in his mouth and tightened his tie as he walked. No stranger to being awoken to attend to his international clients arriving from different time zones, Vernet modeled his sleep habits after the Maasai warriors—the African tribe famous for their ability to rise from the deepest sleep to a state of total battle readiness in a matter of seconds.
Battle ready, Vernet thought, fearing the comparison might be uncharacteristically apt tonight. The arrival of a gold key client always required an extra flurry of attention, but the arrival of a gold key client who was wanted by the Judicial Police would be an extremely delicate matter. The bank had enough battles with law enforcement over the privacy rights of their clients without proof that some of them were criminals.
Five minutes, Vernet told himself. I need these people out of my bank before the police arrive.
If he moved quickly, this impending disaster could be deftly sidestepped. Vernet could tell the police that the fugitives in question had indeed walked into his bank as reported, but because they were not clients and had no account number, they were turned away. He wished the damned watchman had not called Interpol. Discretion was apparently not part of the vocabulary of a 15-euro-per-hour watchman.
Stopping at the doorway, he took a deep breath and loosened his muscles. Then, forcing a balmy smile, he unlocked the door and swirled into the room like a warm breeze.
"Good evening," he said, his eyes finding his clients. "I am André Vernet. How can I be of serv—" The rest of the sentence lodged somewhere beneath his Adam's apple. The woman before him was as unexpected a visitor as Vernet had ever had. 
"I'm sorry, do we know each other?" Sophie asked. She did not recognize the banker, but he for a moment looked as if he'd seen a ghost.
"No...," the bank president fumbled. "I don't... believe so. Our services are anonymous." He exhaled and forced a calm smile. "My assistant tells me you have a gold key but no account number? Might I ask how you came by this key?"
"My grandfather gave it to me," Sophie replied, watching the man closely. His uneasiness seemed more evident now.

"Really? Your grandfather gave you the key but failed to give you the account number?"
"I don't think he had time," Sophie said. "He was murdered tonight."
Her words sent the man staggering backward. "Jacques Saunière is dead?" he demanded, his eyes filling with horror. "But... how?!"
Now it was Sophie who reeled, numb with shock. "You knew my grandfather?"
Banker André Vernet looked equally astounded, steadying himself by leaning on an end table. "Jacques and I were dear friends. When did this happen?"
"Earlier this evening. Inside the Louvre."
Vernet walked to a deep leather chair and sank into it. "I need to ask you both a very important question." He glanced up at Langdon and then back to Sophie. "Did either of you have anything to do with his death?"
"No!" Sophie declared. "Absolutely not."
Vernet's face was grim, and he paused, pondering. "Your pictures are being circulated by Interpol. This is how I recognized you. You're wanted for a murder."
Sophie slumped. Fache ran an Interpol broadcast already? It seemed the captain was more motivated than Sophie had anticipated. She quickly told Vernet who Langdon was and what had happened inside the Louvre tonight.
Vernet looked amazed. "And as your grandfather was dying, he left you a message telling you to find Mr. Langdon?"
"Yes. And this key." Sophie laid the gold key on the coffee table in front of Vernet, placing the Priory seal face down.
Vernet glanced at the key but made no move to touch it. "He left you only this key? Nothing else? No slip of paper?"
Sophie knew she had been in a hurry inside the Louvre, but she was certain she had seen nothing else behind Madonna of the Rocks. "No. Just the key."
Vernet gave a helpless sigh. "I'm afraid every key is electronically paired with a ten-digit account number that functions as a password. Without that number, your key is worthless."
Ten digits. Sophie reluctantly calculated the cryptographic odds. Over ten billion possible choices.

Even if she could bring in DCPJ's most powerful parallel processing computers, she still would need weeks to break the code. "Certainly, monsieur, considering the circumstances, you can help us."
"I'm sorry. I truly can do nothing. Clients select their own account numbers via a secure terminal, meaning account numbers are known only to the client and computer. This is one way we ensure anonymity. And the safety of our employees."
Sophie understood. Convenience stores did the same thing. EMPLOYEES DO NOT HAVE KEYS TO THE SAFE. This bank obviously did not want to risk someone stealing a key and then holding an employee hostage for the account number.
Sophie sat down beside Langdon, glanced down at the key and then up at Vernet. "Do you have any idea what my grandfather is storing in your bank?"
"None whatsoever. That is the definition of a Geldschrank bank."
"Monsieur Vernet," she pressed, "our time tonight is short. I am going to be very direct if I may." She reached out to the gold key and flipped it over, watching the man's eyes as she revealed the Priory of Sion seal. "Does the symbol on this key mean anything to you?"
Vernet glanced down at the fleur-de-lis seal and made no reaction. "No, but many of our clients emboss corporate logos or initials onto their keys."
Sophie sighed, still watching him carefully. "This seal is the symbol of a secret society known as the Priory of Sion."
Vernet again showed no reaction. "I know nothing of this. Your grandfather was a friend, but we spoke mostly of business." The man adjusted his tie, looking nervous now.
"Monsieur Vernet," Sophie pressed, her tone firm. "My grandfather called me tonight and told me he and I were in grave danger. He said he had to give me something. He gave me a key to your bank. Now he is dead. Anything you can tell us would be helpful."
Vernet broke a sweat. "We need to get out of the building. I'm afraid the police will arrive shortly. My watchman felt obliged to call Interpol."
Sophie had feared as much. She took one last shot. "My grandfather said he needed to tell me the truth about my family. Does that mean anything to you?"
"Mademoiselle, your family died in a car accident when you were young. I'm sorry. I know your grandfather loved you very much. He mentioned to me several times how much it pained him that you two had fallen out of touch."

Sophie was uncertain how to respond.
Langdon asked, "Do the contents of this account have anything to do with the Sangreal?"
Vernet gave him an odd look. "I have no idea what that is." Just then, Vernet's cell phone rang, and he snatched it off his belt. "Oui?" He listened a moment, his expression one of surprise and growing concern. "La police? Si rapidement?" He cursed, gave some quick directions in French, and said he would be up to the lobby in a minute.
Hanging up the phone, he turned back to Sophie. "The police have responded far more quickly than usual. They are arriving as we speak."
Sophie had no intention of leaving empty-handed. "Tell them we came and went already. If they want to search the bank, demand a search warrant. That will take them time."
"Listen," Vernet said, "Jacques was a friend, and my bank does not need this kind of press, so for those two reasons, I have no intention of allowing this arrest to be made on my premises. Give me a minute and I will see what I can do to help you leave the bank undetected. Beyond that, I cannot get involved." He stood up and hurried for the door. "Stay here. I'll make arrangements and be right back."
"But the safe-deposit box," Sophie declared. "We can't just leave."
"There's nothing I can do," Vernet said, hurrying out the door. "I'm sorry."
Sophie stared after him a moment, wondering if maybe the account number was buried in one of the countless letters and packages her grandfather had sent her over the years and which she had left unopened.
Langdon stood suddenly, and Sophie sensed an unexpected glimmer of contentment in his eyes.
"Robert? You're smiling."
"Your grandfather was a genius."
"I'm sorry?"
"Ten digits?"
Sophie had no idea what he was talking about.
"The account number," he said, a familiar lopsided grin now craning his face. "I'm pretty sure he 

left it for us after all."
"Where?"
Langdon produced the printout of the crime scene photo and spread it out on the coffee table. Sophie needed only to read the first line to know Langdon was correct.
13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5
O, Draconian devil!
Oh, lame saint!
P.S. Find Robert Langdon 
CHAPTER 44
"Ten digits," Sophie said, her cryptologic senses tingling as she studied the printout.
13-3-2-21-1-1-8-5
Grand-père wrote his account number on the Louvre floor!
When Sophie had first seen the scrambled Fibonacci sequence on the parquet, she had assumed its sole purpose was to encourage DCPJ to call in their cryptographers and get Sophie involved. Later, she realized the numbers were also a clue as to how to decipher the other lines—a sequence out of order... a numeric anagram. Now, utterly amazed, she saw the numbers had a more important meaning still. They were almost certainly the final key to opening her grandfather's mysterious safe-deposit box.
"He was the master of double-entendres," Sophie said, turning to Langdon. "He loved anything with multiple layers of meaning. Codes within codes."
Langdon was already moving toward the electronic podium near the conveyor belt. Sophie grabbed the computer printout and followed.
The podium had a keypad similar to that of a bank ATM terminal. The screen displayed the bank's cruciform logo. Beside the keypad was a triangular hole. Sophie wasted no time inserting the shaft of her key into the hole.
The screen refreshed instantly.
ACCOUNT NUMBER: _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

The cursor blinked. Waiting.
Ten digits. Sophie read the numbers off the printout, and Langdon typed them in.
ACCOUNT NUMBER: 1332211185 
When he had typed the last digit, the screen refreshed again. A message in several languages appeared. English was on top.
CAUTION:
Before you strike the enter key, please check the accuracy of your account number.
For your own security, if the computer does not recognize your account number, this system will automatically shut down. 
"Fonction terminer," Sophie said, frowning. "Looks like we only get one try." Standard ATM machines allowed users three attempts to type a PIN before confiscating their bank card. This was obviously no ordinary cash machine.
"The number looks right," Langdon confirmed, carefully checking what they had typed and comparing it to the printout. He motioned to the ENTER key. "Fire away."
Sophie extended her index finger toward the keypad, but hesitated, an odd thought now hitting her.
"Go ahead," Langdon urged. "Vernet will be back soon."
"No." She pulled her hand away. "This isn't the right account number."
"Of course it is! Ten digits. What else would it be?"
"It's too random."
Too random? Langdon could not have disagreed more. Every bank advised its customers to choose PINs at random so nobody could guess them. Certainly clients here would be advised to choose their account numbers at random.

Sophie deleted everything she had just typed in and looked up at Langdon, her gaze self-assured. "It's far too coincidental that this supposedly random account number could be rearranged to form the Fibonacci sequence."
Langdon realized she had a point. Earlier, Sophie had rearranged this account number into the Fibonacci sequence. What were the odds of being able to do that?
Sophie was at the keypad again, entering a different number, as if from memory. "Moreover, with my grandfather's love of symbolism and codes, it seems to follow that he would have chosen an account number that had meaning to him, something he could easily remember." She finished typing the entry and gave a sly smile. "Something that appeared random... but was not." Langdon looked at the screen.
ACCOUNT NUMBER: 1123581321 
It took him an instant, but when Langdon spotted it, he knew she was right.
The Fibonacci sequence.
1-1-2-3-5-8-13-21
When the Fibonacci sequence was melded into a single ten-digit number, it became virtually unrecognizable. Easy to remember, and yet seemingly random. A brilliant ten-digit code that Saunière would never forget. Furthermore, it perfectly explained why the scrambled numbers on the Louvre floor could be rearranged to form the famous progression.
Sophie reached down and pressed the ENTER key.
Nothing happened.
At least nothing they could detect. 
At that moment, beneath them, in the bank's cavernous subterranean vault, a robotic claw sprang to life. Sliding on a double-axis transport system attached to the ceiling, the claw headed off in search of the proper coordinates. On the cement floor below, hundreds of identical plastic crates lay aligned on an enormous grid... like rows of small coffins in an underground crypt.
Whirring to a stop over the correct spot on the floor, the claw dropped down, an electric eye confirming the bar code on the box. Then, with computer precision, the claw grasped the heavy handle and hoisted the crate vertically. New gears engaged, and the claw transported the box to the 

far side of the vault, coming to a stop over a stationary conveyor belt.
Gently now, the retrieval arm set down the crate and retracted.
Once the arm was clear, the conveyor belt whirred to life.... 
Upstairs, Sophie and Langdon exhaled in relief to see the conveyor belt move. Standing beside the belt, they felt like weary travelers at baggage claim awaiting a mysterious piece of luggage whose contents were unknown.
The conveyor belt entered the room on their right through a narrow slit beneath a retractable door. The metal door slid up, and a huge plastic box appeared, emerging from the depths on the inclined conveyor belt. The box was black, heavy molded plastic, and far larger than she imagined. It looked like an air-freight pet transport crate without any airholes.
The box coasted to a stop directly in front of them.
Langdon and Sophie stood there, silent, staring at the mysterious container.
Like everything else about this bank, this crate was industrial—metal clasps, a bar code sticker on top, and molded heavy-duty handle. Sophie thought it looked like a giant toolbox.
Wasting no time, Sophie unhooked the two buckles facing her. Then she glanced over at Langdon. Together, they raised the heavy lid and let it fall back.
Stepping forward, they peered down into the crate.
At first glance, Sophie thought the crate was empty. Then she saw something. Sitting at the bottom of the crate. A lone item.
The polished wooden box was about the size of a shoebox and had ornate hinges. The wood was a lustrous deep purple with a strong grain. Rosewood, Sophie realized. Her grandfather's favorite. The lid bore a beautiful inlaid design of a rose. She and Langdon exchanged puzzled looks. Sophie leaned in and grabbed the box, lifting it out.
My God, it's heavy!
She carried it gingerly to a large receiving table and set it down. Langdon stood beside her, both of them staring at the small treasure chest her grandfather apparently had sent them to retrieve.
Langdon stared in wonderment at the lid's hand-carved inlay—a five-petal rose. He had seen this 

type of rose many times. "The five-petal rose," he whispered, "is a Priory symbol for the Holy Grail."
Sophie turned and looked at him. Langdon could see what she was thinking, and he was thinking it too. The dimensions of the box, the apparent weight of its contents, and a Priory symbol for the Grail all seemed to imply one unfathomable conclusion. The Cup of Christ is in this wooden box. Langdon again told himself it was impossible.
"It's a perfect size," Sophie whispered, "to hold... a chalice."
It can't be a chalice.
Sophie pulled the box toward her across the table, preparing to open it. As she moved it, though, something unexpected happened. The box let out an odd gurgling sound.
Langdon did a double take. There's liquid inside?
Sophie looked equally confused. "Did you just hear...?"
Langdon nodded, lost. "Liquid."
Reaching forward, Sophie slowly unhooked the clasp and raised the lid.
The object inside was unlike anything Langdon had ever seen. One thing was immediately clear to both of them, however. This was definitely not the Cup of Christ. 
CHAPTER 45
"The police are blocking the street," André Vernet said, walking into the waiting room. "Getting you out will be difficult." As he closed the door behind him, Vernet saw the heavy-duty plastic case on the conveyor belt and halted in his tracks. My God! They accessed Saunière's account?
Sophie and Langdon were at the table, huddling over what looked to be a large wooden jewelry box. Sophie immediately closed the lid and looked up. "We had the account number after all," she said.
Vernet was speechless. This changed everything. He respectfully diverted his eyes from the box and tried to figure out his next move. I have to get them out of the bank! But with the police already having set up a roadblock, Vernet could imagine only one way to do that. "Mademoiselle Neveu, if I can get you safely out of the bank, will you be taking the item with you or returning it to the vault before you leave?"

Sophie glanced at Langdon and then back to Vernet. "We need to take it."
Vernet nodded. "Very well. Then whatever the item is, I suggest you wrap it in your jacket as we move through the hallways. I would prefer nobody else see it."
As Langdon shed his jacket, Vernet hurried over to the conveyor belt, closed the now empty crate, and typed a series of simple commands. The conveyor belt began moving again, carrying the plastic container back down to the vault. Pulling the gold key from the podium, he handed it to Sophie.
"This way please. Hurry."
When they reached the rear loading dock, Vernet could see the flash of police lights filtering through the underground garage. He frowned. They were probably blocking the ramp. Am I really going to try to pull this off? He was sweating now.
Vernet motioned to one of the bank's small armored trucks. Transport sûr was another service offered by the Depository Bank of Zurich.
"Get in the cargo hold," he said, heaving open the massive rear door and motioning to the glistening steel compartment. "I'll be right back."
As Sophie and Langdon climbed in, Vernet hurried across the loading dock to the dock overseer's office, let himself in, collected the keys for the truck, and found a driver's uniform jacket and cap. Shedding his own suit coat and tie, he began to put on the driver's jacket. Reconsidering, he donned a shoulder holster beneath the uniform. On his way out, he grabbed a driver's pistol from the rack, put in a clip, and stuffed it in the holster, buttoning his uniform over it. Returning to the truck, Vernet pulled the driver's cap down low and peered in at Sophie and Langdon, who were standing inside the empty steel box.
"You'll want this on," Vernet said, reaching inside and flicking a wall switch to illuminate the lone courtesy bulb on the hold's ceiling. "And you'd better sit down. Not a sound on our way out the gate."
Sophie and Langdon sat down on the metal floor. Langdon cradled the treasure wadded in his tweed jacket. Swinging the heavy doors closed, Vernet locked them inside. Then he got in behind the wheel and revved the engine.
As the armored truck lumbered toward the top of the ramp, Vernet could feel the sweat already collecting beneath his driver's cap. He could see there were far more police lights in front than he had imagined. As the truck powered up the ramp, the interior gate swung inward to let him pass. Vernet advanced and waited while the gate behind him closed before pulling forward and tripping 

the next sensor. The second gate opened, and the exit beckoned.
Except for the police car blocking the top of the ramp.
Vernet dabbed his brow and pulled forward.
A lanky officer stepped out and waved him to a stop a few meters from the roadblock. Four patrol cars were parked out front.
Vernet stopped. Pulling his driver's cap down farther, he effected as rough a facade as his cultured upbringing would allow. Not budging from behind the wheel, he opened the door and gazed down at the agent, whose face was stern and sallow.
"Qu'est-ce qui se passe?" Vernet asked, his tone rough.
"Je suis Jérome Collet," the agent said. "Lieutenant Police Judiciaire." He motioned to the truck's cargo hold. "Qu'est-ce qu'ily a là dedans?"
"Hell if I know," Vernet replied in crude French. "I'm only a driver."
Collet looked unimpressed. "We're looking for two criminals."
Vernet laughed. "Then you came to the right spot. Some of these bastards I drive for have so much money they must be criminals."
The agent held up a passport picture of Robert Langdon. "Was this man in your bank tonight?"
Vernet shrugged. "No clue. I'm a dock rat. They don't let us anywhere near the clients. You need to go in and ask the front desk."
"Your bank is demanding a search warrant before we can enter."
Vernet put on a disgusted look. "Administrators. Don't get me started."
"Open your truck, please." Collet motioned toward the cargo hold.
Vernet stared at the agent and forced an obnoxious laugh. "Open the truck? You think I have keys? You think they trust us? You should see the crap wages I get paid."
The agent's head tilted to one side, his skepticism evident. "You're telling me you don't have keys to your own truck?"
Vernet shook his head. "Not the cargo area. Ignition only. These trucks get sealed by overseers on 

the loading dock. Then the truck sits in dock while someone drives the cargo keys to the drop-off. Once we get the call that the cargo keys are with the recipient, then I get the okay to drive. Not a second before. I never know what the hell I'm lugging."
"When was this truck sealed?"
"Must have been hours ago. I'm driving all the way up to St. Thurial tonight. Cargo keys are already up there."
The agent made no response, his eyes probing as if trying to read Vernet's mind.
A drop of sweat was preparing to slide down Vernet's nose. "You mind?" he said, wiping his nose with his sleeve and motioning to the police car blocking his way. "I'm on a tight schedule."
"Do all the drivers wear Rolexes?" the agent asked, pointing to Vernet's wrist.
Vernet glanced down and saw the glistening band of his absurdly expensive watch peeking out from beneath the sleeve of his jacket. Merde. "This piece of shit? Bought it for twenty euro from a Taiwanese street vendor in St. Germain des Prés. I'll sell it to you for forty."
The agent paused and finally stepped aside. "No thanks. Have a safe trip."
Vernet did not breathe again until the truck was a good fifty meters down the street. And now he had another problem. His cargo. Where do I take them? 
CHAPTER 46
Silas lay prone on the canvas mat in his room, allowing the lash wounds on his back to clot in the air. Tonight's second session with the Discipline had left him dizzy and weak. He had yet to remove the cilice belt, and he could feel the blood trickling down his inner thigh. Still, he could not justify removing the strap.
I have failed the Church.
Far worse, I have failed the bishop.
Tonight was supposed to be Bishop Aringarosa's salvation. Five months ago, the bishop had returned from a meeting at the Vatican Observatory, where he had learned something that left him deeply changed. Depressed for weeks, Aringarosa had finally shared the news with Silas.
"But this is impossible!" Silas had cried out. "I cannot accept it!"

"It is true," Aringarosa said. "Unthinkable, but true. In only six months."
The bishop's words terrified Silas. He prayed for deliverance, and even in those dark days, his trust in God and The Way never wavered. It was only a month later that the clouds parted miraculously and the light of possibility shone through.
Divine intervention, Aringarosa had called it.
The bishop had seemed hopeful for the first time. "Silas," he whispered, "God has bestowed upon us an opportunity to protect The Way. Our battle, like all battles, will take sacrifice. Will you be a soldier of God?"
Silas fell to his knees before Bishop Aringarosa—the man who had given him a new life—and he said, "I am a lamb of God. Shepherd me as your heart commands."
When Aringarosa described the opportunity that had presented itself, Silas knew it could only be the hand of God at work. Miraculous fate! Aringarosa put Silas in contact with the man who had proposed the plan—a man who called himself the Teacher. Although the Teacher and Silas never met face-to-face, each time they spoke by phone, Silas was awed, both by the profundity of the Teacher's faith and by the scope of his power. The Teacher seemed to be a man who knew all, a man with eyes and ears in all places. How the Teacher gathered his information, Silas did not know, but Aringarosa had placed enormous trust in the Teacher, and he had told Silas to do the same. "Do as the Teacher commands you," the bishop told Silas. "And we will be victorious."
Victorious. Silas now gazed at the bare floor and feared victory had eluded them. The Teacher had been tricked. The keystone was a devious dead end. And with the deception, all hope had vanished.
Silas wished he could call Bishop Aringarosa and warn him, but the Teacher had removed all their lines of direct communication tonight. For our safety.
Finally, overcoming enormous trepidation, Silas crawled to his feet and found his robe, which lay on the floor. He dug his cell phone from the pocket. Hanging his head in shame, he dialed.
"Teacher," he whispered, "all is lost." Silas truthfully told the man how he had been tricked.
"You lose your faith too quickly," the Teacher replied. "I have just received news. Most unexpected and welcome. The secret lives. Jacques Saunière transferred information before he died. I will call you soon. Our work tonight is not yet done." 
CHAPTER 47

Riding inside the dimly lit cargo hold of the armored truck was like being transported inside a cell for solitary confinement. Langdon fought the all too familiar anxiety that haunted him in confined spaces. Vernet said he would take us a safe distance out of the city. Where? How far?
Langdon's legs had gotten stiff from sitting cross-legged on the metal floor, and he shifted his position, wincing to feel the blood pouring back into his lower body. In his arms, he still clutched the bizarre treasure they had extricated from the bank.
"I think we're on the highway now," Sophie whispered.
Langdon sensed the same thing. The truck, after an unnerving pause atop the bank ramp, had moved on, snaking left and right for a minute or two, and was now accelerating to what felt like top speed. Beneath them, the bulletproof tires hummed on smooth pavement. Forcing his attention to the rosewood box in his arms, Langdon laid the precious bundle on the floor, unwrapped his jacket, and extracted the box, pulling it toward him. Sophie shifted her position so they were sitting side by side. Langdon suddenly felt like they were two kids huddled over a Christmas present.
In contrast to the warm colors of the rosewood box, the inlaid rose had been crafted of a pale wood, probably ash, which shone clearly in the dim light. The Rose. Entire armies and religions had been built on this symbol, as had secret societies. The Rosicrucians. The Knights of the Rosy Cross.
"Go ahead," Sophie said. "Open it."
Langdon took a deep breath. Reaching for the lid, he stole one more admiring glance at the intricate woodwork and then, unhooking the clasp, he opened the lid, revealing the object within.
Langdon had harbored several fantasies about what they might find inside this box, but clearly he had been wrong on every account. Nestled snugly inside the box's heavily padded interior of crimson silk lay an object Langdon could not even begin to comprehend.
Crafted of polished white marble, it was a stone cylinder approximately the dimensions of a tennis ball can. More complicated than a simple column of stone, however, the cylinder appeared to have been assembled in many pieces. Six doughnut-sized disks of marble had been stacked and affixed to one another within a delicate brass framework. It looked like some kind of tubular, multiwheeled kaleidoscope. Each end of the cylinder was affixed with an end cap, also marble, making it impossible to see inside. Having heard liquid within, Langdon assumed the cylinder was hollow.
As mystifying as the construction of the cylinder was, however, it was the engravings around the tube's circumference that drew Langdon's primary focus. Each of the six disks had been carefully carved with the same unlikely series of letters—the entire alphabet. The lettered cylinder reminded Langdon of one of his childhood toys—a rod threaded with lettered tumblers that could be rotated to spell different words.

"Amazing, isn't it?" Sophie whispered.
Langdon glanced up. "I don't know. What the hell is it?"
Now there was a glint in Sophie's eye. "My grandfather used to craft these as a hobby. They were invented by Leonardo da Vinci."
Even in the diffuse light, Sophie could see Langdon's surprise.
"Da Vinci?" he muttered, looking again at the canister.
"Yes. It's called a cryptex. According to my grandfather, the blueprints come from one of Da Vinci's secret diaries."
"What is it for?"
Considering tonight's events, Sophie knew the answer might have some interesting implications. "It's a vault," she said. "For storing secret information."
Langdon's eyes widened further.
Sophie explained that creating models of Da Vinci's inventions was one of her grandfather's best-loved hobbies. A talented craftsman who spent hours in his wood and metal shop, Jacques Saunière enjoyed imitating master craftsmen—Fabergé, assorted cloisonne artisans, and the less artistic, but far more practical, Leonardo da Vinci.
Even a cursory glance through Da Vinci's journals revealed why the luminary was as notorious for his lack of follow-through as he was famous for his brilliance. Da Vinci had drawn up blueprints for hundreds of inventions he had never built. One of Jacques Saunière's favorite pastimes was bringing Da Vinci's more obscure brainstorms to life—timepieces, water pumps, cryptexes, and even a fully articulated model of a medieval French knight, which now stood proudly on the desk in his office. Designed by Da Vinci in 1495 as an outgrowth of his earliest anatomy and kinesiology studies, the internal mechanism of the robot knight possessed accurate joints and tendons, and was designed to sit up, wave its arms, and move its head via a flexible neck while opening and closing an anatomically correct jaw. This armor-clad knight, Sophie had always believed, was the most beautiful object her grandfather had ever built... that was, until she had seen the cryptex in this rosewood box.
"He made me one of these when I was little," Sophie said. "But I've never seen one so ornate and large."
Langdon's eyes had never left the box. "I've never heard of a cryptex."

Sophie was not surprised. Most of Leonardo's unbuilt inventions had never been studied or even named. The term cryptex possibly had been her grandfather's creation, an apt title for this device that used the science of cryptology to protect information written on the contained scroll or codex.
Da Vinci had been a cryptology pioneer, Sophie knew, although he was seldom given credit. Sophie's university instructors, while presenting computer encryption methods for securing data, praised modern cryptologists like Zimmerman and Schneier but failed to mention that it was Leonardo who had invented one of the first rudimentary forms of public key encryption centuries ago. Sophie's grandfather, of course, had been the one to tell her all about that.
As their armored truck roared down the highway, Sophie explained to Langdon that the cryptex had been Da Vinci's solution to the dilemma of sending secure messages over long distances. In an era without telephones or e-mail, anyone wanting to convey private information to someone far away had no option but to write it down and then trust a messenger to carry the letter. Unfortunately, if a messenger suspected the letter might contain valuable information, he could make far more money selling the information to adversaries than he could delivering the letter properly.
Many great minds in history had invented cryptologic solutions to the challenge of data protection: Julius Caesar devised a code-writing scheme called the Caesar Box; Mary, Queen of Scots created a transposition cipher and sent secret communiqués from prison; and the brilliant Arab scientist Abu Yusuf Ismail al-Kindi protected his secrets with an ingeniously conceived polyalphabetic substitution cipher.
Da Vinci, however, eschewed mathematics and cryptology for a mechanical solution. The cryptex. A portable container that could safeguard letters, maps, diagrams, anything at all. Once information was sealed inside the cryptex, only the individual with the proper password could access it.
"We require a password," Sophie said, pointing out the lettered dials. "A cryptex works much like a bicycle's combination lock. If you align the dials in the proper position, the lock slides open. This cryptex has five lettered dials. When you rotate them to their proper sequence, the tumblers inside align, and the entire cylinder slides apart."
"And inside?"
"Once the cylinder slides apart, you have access to a hollow central compartment, which can hold a scroll of paper on which is the information you want to keep private."
Langdon looked incredulous. "And you say your grandfather built these for you when you were younger?"
"Some smaller ones, yes. A couple times for my birthday, he gave me a cryptex and told me a riddle. The answer to the riddle was the password to the cryptex, and once I figured it out, I could 

open it up and find my birthday card."
"A lot of work for a card."
"No, the cards always contained another riddle or clue. My grandfather loved creating elaborate treasure hunts around our house, a string of clues that eventually led to my real gift. Each treasure hunt was a test of character and merit, to ensure I earned my rewards. And the tests were never simple."
Langdon eyed the device again, still looking skeptical. "But why not just pry it apart? Or smash it? The metal looks delicate, and marble is a soft rock."
Sophie smiled. "Because Da Vinci is too smart for that. He designed the cryptex so that if you try to force it open in any way, the information self-destructs. Watch." Sophie reached into the box and carefully lifted out the cylinder. "Any information to be inserted is first written on a papyrus scroll."
"Not vellum?"
Sophie shook her head. "Papyrus. I know sheep's vellum was more durable and more common in those days, but it had to be papyrus. The thinner the better."
"Okay."
"Before the papyrus was inserted into the cryptex's compartment, it was rolled around a delicate glass vial." She tipped the cryptex, and the liquid inside gurgled. "A vial of liquid."
"Liquid what?"
Sophie smiled. "Vinegar."
Langdon hesitated a moment and then began nodding. "Brilliant."
Vinegar and papyrus, Sophie thought. If someone attempted to force open the cryptex, the glass vial would break, and the vinegar would quickly dissolve the papyrus. By the time anyone extracted the secret message, it would be a glob of meaningless pulp.
"As you can see," Sophie told him, "the only way to access the information inside is to know the proper five-letter password. And with five dials, each with twenty-six letters, that's twenty-six to the fifth power." She quickly estimated the permutations. "Approximately twelve million possibilities."
"If you say so," Langdon said, looking like he had approximately twelve million questions running 

through his head. "What information do you think is inside?"
"Whatever it is, my grandfather obviously wanted very badly to keep it secret." She paused, closing the box lid and eyeing the five-petal Rose inlaid on it. Something was bothering her. "Did you say earlier that the Rose is a symbol for the Grail?"
"Exactly. In Priory symbolism, the Rose and the Grail are synonymous."
Sophie furrowed her brow. "That's strange, because my grandfather always told me the Rose meant secrecy. He used to hang a rose on his office door at home when he was having a confidential phone call and didn't want me to disturb him. He encouraged me to do the same." Sweetie, her grandfather said, rather than lock each other out, we can each hang a rose—la fleur des secrets—on our door when we need privacy. This way we learn to respect and trust each other. Hanging a rose is an ancient Roman custom.
"Sub rosa," Langdon said. "The Romans hung a rose over meetings to indicate the meeting was confidential. Attendees understood that whatever was said under the rose—or sub rosa—had to remain a secret."
Langdon quickly explained that the Rose's overtone of secrecy was not the only reason the Priory used it as a symbol for the Grail. Rosa rugosa, one of the oldest species of rose, had five petals and pentagonal symmetry, just like the guiding star of Venus, giving the Rose strong iconographic ties to womanhood. In addition, the Rose had close ties to the concept of "true direction" and navigating one's way. The Compass Rose helped travelers navigate, as did Rose Lines, the longitudinal lines on maps. For this reason, the Rose was a symbol that spoke of the Grail on many levels—secrecy, womanhood, and guidance—the feminine chalice and guiding star that led to secret truth.
As Langdon finished his explanation, his expression seemed to tighten suddenly.
"Robert? Are you okay?"
His eyes were riveted to the rosewood box. "Sub... rosa," he choked, a fearful bewilderment sweeping across his face. "It can't be."
"What?"
Langdon slowly raised his eyes. "Under the sign of the Rose," he whispered. "This cryptex... I think I know what it is." 
CHAPTER 48

Langdon could scarcely believe his own supposition, and yet, considering who had given this stone cylinder to them, how he had given it to them, and now, the inlaid Rose on the container, Langdon could formulate only one conclusion.
I am holding the Priory keystone.
The legend was specific.
The keystone is an encoded stone that lies beneath the sign of the Rose.
"Robert?" Sophie was watching him. "What's going on?"
Langdon needed a moment to gather his thoughts. "Did your grandfather ever speak to you of something called la clef de voûte?"
"The key to the vault?" Sophie translated.
"No, that's the literal translation. Clef de voûte is a common architectural term. Voûte refers not to a bank vault, but to a vault in an archway. Like a vaulted ceiling."
"But vaulted ceilings don't have keys."
"Actually they do. Every stone archway requires a central, wedge-shaped stone at the top which locks the pieces together and carries all the weight. This stone is, in an architectural sense, the key to the vault. In English we call it a keystone." Langdon watched her eyes for any spark of recognition.
Sophie shrugged, glancing down at the cryptex. "But this obviously is not a keystone."
Langdon didn't know where to begin. Keystones as a masonry technique for building stone archways had been one of the best-kept secrets of the early Masonic brotherhood. The Royal Arch Degree. Architecture. Keystones. It was all interconnected. The secret knowledge of how to use a wedged keystone to build a vaulted archway was part of the wisdom that had made the Masons such wealthy craftsmen, and it was a secret they guarded carefully. Keystones had always had a tradition of secrecy. And yet, the stone cylinder in the rosewood box was obviously something quite different. The Priory keystone—if this was indeed what they were holding—was not at all what Langdon had imagined.
"The Priory keystone is not my specialty," Langdon admitted. "My interest in the Holy Grail is primarily symbologic, so I tend to ignore the plethora of lore regarding how to actually find it."
Sophie's eyebrows arched. "Find the Holy Grail?"

Langdon gave an uneasy nod, speaking his next words carefully. "Sophie, according to Priory lore, the keystone is an encoded map... a map that reveals the hiding place of the Holy Grail."
Sophie's face went blank. "And you think this is it?"
Langdon didn't know what to say. Even to him it sounded unbelievable, and yet the keystone was the only logical conclusion he could muster. An encrypted stone, hidden beneath the sign of the Rose.
The idea that the cryptex had been designed by Leonardo da Vinci—former Grand Master of the Priory of Sion—shone as another tantalizing indicator that this was indeed the Priory keystone. A former Grand Master's blueprint... brought to life centuries later by another Priory member. The bond was too palpable to dismiss.
For the last decade, historians had been searching for the keystone in French churches. Grail seekers, familiar with the Priory's history of cryptic double-talk, had concluded la clef de voûte was a literal keystone—an architectural wedge—an engraved, encrypted stone, inserted into a vaulted archway in a church. Beneath the sign of the Rose. In architecture, there was no shortage of roses. Rose windows. Rosette reliefs. And, of course, an abundance of cinquefoils—the five-petaled decorative flowers often found at the top of archways, directly over the keystone. The hiding place seemed diabolically simple. The map to the Holy Grail was incorporated high in an archway of some forgotten church, mocking the blind churchgoers who wandered beneath it.
"This cryptex can't be the keystone," Sophie argued. "It's not old enough. I'm certain my grandfather made this. It can't be part of any ancient Grail legend."
"Actually," Langdon replied, feeling a tingle of excitement ripple through him, "the keystone is believed to have been created by the Priory sometime in the past couple of decades."
Sophie's eyes flashed disbelief. "But if this cryptex reveals the hiding place of the Holy Grail, why would my grandfather give it to me? I have no idea how to open it or what to do with it. I don't even know what the Holy Grail is!"
Langdon realized to his surprise that she was right. He had not yet had a chance to explain to Sophie the true nature of the Holy Grail. That story would have to wait. At the moment, they were focused on the keystone.
If that is indeed what this is....
Against the hum of the bulletproof wheels beneath them, Langdon quickly explained to Sophie everything he had heard about the keystone. Allegedly, for centuries, the Priory's biggest secret—the location of the Holy Grail—was never written down. For security's sake, it was 

verbally transferred to each new rising sénéchal at a clandestine ceremony. However, at some point during the last century, whisperings began to surface that the Priory policy had changed. Perhaps it was on account of new electronic eavesdropping capabilities, but the Priory vowed never again even to speak the location of the sacred hiding place.
"But then how could they pass on the secret?" Sophie asked.
"That's where the keystone comes in," Langdon explained. "When one of the top four members died, the remaining three would choose from the lower echelons the next candidate to ascend as sénéchal. Rather than telling the new sénéchal where the Grail was hidden, they gave him a test through which he could prove he was worthy."
Sophie looked unsettled by this, and Langdon suddenly recalled her mentioning how her grandfather used to make treasure hunts for her—preuves de mérite. Admittedly, the keystone was a similar concept. Then again, tests like this were extremely common in secret societies. The best known was the Masons', wherein members ascended to higher degrees by proving they could keep a secret and by performing rituals and various tests of merit over many years. The tasks became progressively harder until they culminated in a successful candidate's induction as thirty-second-degree Mason.
"So the keystone is a preuve de mérite," Sophie said. "If a rising Priory sénéchal can open it, he proves himself worthy of the information it holds."
Langdon nodded. "I forgot you'd had experience with this sort of thing."
"Not only with my grandfather. In cryptology, that's called a 'self-authorizing language.' That is, if you're smart enough to read it, you're permitted to know what is being said."
Langdon hesitated a moment. "Sophie, you realize that if this is indeed the keystone, your grandfather's access to it implies he was exceptionally powerful within the Priory of Sion. He would have to have been one of the highest four members."
Sophie sighed. "He was powerful in a secret society. I'm certain of it. I can only assume it was the Priory."
Langdon did a double take. "You knew he was in a secret society?"
"I saw some things I wasn't supposed to see ten years ago. We haven't spoken since." She paused. "My grandfather was not only a ranking top member of the group... I believe he was the top member."
Langdon could not believe what she had just said. "Grand Master? But... there's no way you could know that!"

"I'd rather not talk about it." Sophie looked away, her expression as determined as it was pained.
Langdon sat in stunned silence. Jacques Saunière? Grand Master? Despite the astonishing repercussions if it were true, Langdon had the eerie sensation it almost made perfect sense. After all, previous Priory Grand Masters had also been distinguished public figures with artistic souls. Proof of that fact had been uncovered years ago in Paris's Bibliothèque Nationale in papers that became known as Les Dossiers Secrets.
Every Priory historian and Grail buff had read the Dossiers. Cataloged under Number 4° lm1 249, the Dossiers Secrets had been authenticated by many specialists and incontrovertibly confirmed what historians had suspected for a long time: Priory Grand Masters included Leonardo da Vinci, Botticelli, Sir Isaac Newton, Victor Hugo, and, more recently, Jean Cocteau, the famous Parisian artist.
Why not Jacques Saunière?
Langdon's incredulity intensified with the realization that he had been slated to meet Saunière tonight. The Priory Grand Master called a meeting with me. Why? To make artistic small talk? It suddenly seemed unlikely. After all, if Langdon's instincts were correct, the Grand Master of the Priory of Sion had just transferred the brotherhood's legendary keystone to his granddaughter and simultaneously commanded her to find Robert Langdon.
Inconceivable!
Langdon's imagination could conjure no set of circumstances that would explain Saunière's behavior. Even if Saunière feared his own death, there were three sénéchaux who also possessed the secret and therefore guaranteed the Priory's security. Why would Saunière take such an enormous risk giving his granddaughter the keystone, especially when the two of them didn't get along? And why involve Langdon... a total stranger?
A piece of this puzzle is missing, Langdon thought.
The answers were apparently going to have to wait. The sound of the slowing engine caused them both to look up. Gravel crunched beneath the tires. Why is he pulling over already? Langdon wondered. Vernet had told them he would take them well outside the city to safety. The truck decelerated to a crawl and made its way over unexpectedly rough terrain. Sophie shot Langdon an uneasy look, hastily closing the cryptex box and latching it. Langdon slipped his jacket back on.
When the truck came to a stop, the engine remained idling as the locks on the rear doors began to turn. When the doors swung open, Langdon was surprised to see they were parked in a wooded area, well off the road. Vernet stepped into view, a strained look in his eye. In his hand, he held a pistol.

"I'm sorry about this," he said. "I really have no choice." 
CHAPTER 49
André Vernet looked awkward with a pistol, but his eyes shone with a determination that Langdon sensed would be unwise to test.
"I'm afraid I must insist," Vernet said, training the weapon on the two of them in the back of the idling truck. "Set the box down."
Sophie clutched the box to her chest. "You said you and my grandfather were friends."
"I have a duty to protect your grandfather's assets," Vernet replied. "And that is exactly what I am doing. Now set the box on the floor."
"My grandfather entrusted this to me!" Sophie declared.
"Do it," Vernet commanded, raising the gun.
Sophie set the box at her feet.
Langdon watched the gun barrel swing now in his direction.
"Mr. Langdon," Vernet said, "you will bring the box over to me. And be aware that I'm asking you because you I would not hesitate to shoot."
Langdon stared at the banker in disbelief. "Why are you doing this?"
"Why do you imagine?" Vernet snapped, his accented English terse now. "To protect my client's assets."
"We are your clients now," Sophie said.
Vernet's visage turned ice-cold, an eerie transformation. "Mademoiselle Neveu, I don't know how you got that key and account number tonight, but it seems obvious that foul play was involved. Had I known the extent of your crimes, I would never have helped you leave the bank."
"I told you," Sophie said, "we had nothing to do with my grandfather's death!"
Vernet looked at Langdon. "And yet the radio claims you are wanted not only for the murder of 

Jacques Saunière but for those of three other men as well?"
"What!" Langdon was thunderstruck. Three more murders? The coincidental number hit him harder than the fact that he was the prime suspect. It seemed too unlikely to be a coincidence. The three sénéchaux? Langdon's eyes dropped to the rosewood box. If the sénéchaux were murdered, Saunière had no options. He had to transfer the keystone to someone.
"The police can sort that out when I turn you in," Vernet said. "I have gotten my bank involved too far already."
Sophie glared at Vernet. "You obviously have no intention of turning us in. You would have driven us back to the bank. And instead you bring us out here and hold us at gunpoint?"
"Your grandfather hired me for one reason—to keep his possessions both safe and private. Whatever this box contains, I have no intention of letting it become a piece of cataloged evidence in a police investigation. Mr. Langdon, bring me the box."
Sophie shook her head. "Don't do it."
A gunshot roared, and a bullet tore into the wall above him. The reverberation shook the back of the truck as a spent shell clinked onto the cargo floor.
Shit! Langdon froze.
Vernet spoke more confidently now. "Mr. Langdon, pick up the box."
Langdon lifted the box.
"Now bring it over to me." Vernet was taking dead aim, standing on the ground behind the rear bumper, his gun outstretched into the cargo hold now.
Box in hand, Langdon moved across the hold toward the open door.
I've got to do something! Langdon thought. I'm about to hand over the Priory keystone! As Langdon moved toward the doorway, his position of higher ground became more pronounced, and he began wondering if he could somehow use it to his advantage. Vernet's gun, though raised, was at Langdon's knee level. A well-placed kick perhaps? Unfortunately, as Langdon neared, Vernet seemed to sense the dangerous dynamic developing, and he took several steps back, repositioning himself six feet away. Well out of reach.
Vernet commanded, "Place the box beside the door."
Seeing no options, Langdon knelt down and set the rosewood box at the edge of the cargo hold, 

directly in front of the open doors.
"Now stand up."
Langdon began to stand up but paused, spying the small, spent pistol shell on the floor beside the truck's precision-crafted doorsill.
"Stand up, and step away from the box."
Langdon paused a moment longer, eyeing the metal threshold. Then he stood. As he did, he discreetly brushed the shell over the edge onto the narrow ledge that was the door's lower sill. Fully upright now, Langdon stepped backward.
"Return to the back wall and turn around."
Langdon obeyed. 
Vernet could feel his own heart pounding. Aiming the gun with his right hand, he reached now with his left for the wooden box. He discovered that it was far too heavy. I need two hands. Turning his eyes back to his captives, he calculated the risk. Both were a good fifteen feet away, at the far end of the cargo hold, facing away from him. Vernet made up his mind. Quickly, he laid down the gun on the bumper, lifted the box with two hands, and set it on the ground, immediately grabbing the gun again and aiming it back into the hold. Neither of his prisoners had moved.
Perfect. Now all that remained was to close and lock the door. Leaving the box on the ground for the moment, he grabbed the metal door and began to heave it closed. As the door swung past him, Vernet reached up to grab the single bolt that needed to be slid into place. The door closed with a thud, and Vernet quickly grabbed the bolt, pulling it to the left. The bolt slid a few inches and crunched to an unexpected halt, not lining up with its sleeve. What's going on? Vernet pulled again, but the bolt wouldn't lock. The mechanism was not properly aligned. The door isn't fully closed! Feeling a surge of panic, Vernet shoved hard against the outside of the door, but it refused to budge. Something is blocking it! Vernet turned to throw full shoulder into the door, but this time the door exploded outward, striking Vernet in the face and sending him reeling backward onto the ground, his nose shattering in pain. The gun flew as Vernet reached for his face and felt the warm blood running from his nose.
Robert Langdon hit the ground somewhere nearby, and Vernet tried to get up, but he couldn't see. His vision blurred and he fell backward again. Sophie Neveu was shouting. Moments later, Vernet felt a cloud of dirt and exhaust billowing over him. He heard the crunching of tires on gravel and sat up just in time to see the truck's wide wheelbase fail to navigate a turn. There was a crash as the front bumper clipped a tree. The engine roared, and the tree bent. Finally, it was the bumper that 

gave, tearing half off. The armored car lurched away, its front bumper dragging. When the truck reached the paved access road, a shower of sparks lit up the night, trailing the truck as it sped away.
Vernet turned his eyes back to the ground where the truck had been parked. Even in the faint moonlight he could see there was nothing there.
The wooden box was gone. 
CHAPTER 50
The unmarked Fiat sedan departing Castel Gandolfo snaked downward through the Alban Hills into the valley below. In the back seat, Bishop Aringarosa smiled, feeling the weight of the bearer bonds in the briefcase on his lap and wondering how long it would be before he and the Teacher could make the exchange.
Twenty million euro.
The sum would buy Aringarosa power far more valuable than that.
As his car sped back toward Rome, Aringarosa again found himself wondering why the Teacher had not yet contacted him. Pulling his cell phone from his cassock pocket, he checked the carrier signal. Extremely faint.
"Cell service is intermittent up here," the driver said, glancing at him in the rearview mirror. "In about five minutes, we'll be out of the mountains, and service improves."
"Thank you." Aringarosa felt a sudden surge of concern. No service in the mountains? Maybe the Teacher had been trying to reach him all this time. Maybe something had gone terribly wrong.
Quickly, Aringarosa checked the phone's voice mail. Nothing. Then again, he realized, the Teacher never would have left a recorded message; he was a man who took enormous care with his communications. Nobody understood better than the Teacher the perils of speaking openly in this modern world. Electronic eavesdropping had played a major role in how he had gathered his astonishing array of secret knowledge.
For this reason, he takes extra precautions.
Unfortunately, the Teacher's protocols for caution included a refusal to give Aringarosa any kind of contact number. I alone will initiate contact, the Teacher had informed him. So keep your phone close. Now that Aringarosa realized his phone might not have been working properly, he feared what the Teacher might think if he had been repeatedly phoning with no answer.

He'll think something is wrong.
Or that I failed to get the bonds.
The bishop broke a light sweat.
Or worse... that I took the money and ran! 
CHAPTER 51
Even at a modest sixty kilometers an hour, the dangling front bumper of the armored truck grated against the deserted suburban road with a grinding roar, spraying sparks up onto the hood.
We've got to get off the road, Langdon thought.
He could barely even see where they were headed. The truck's lone working headlight had been knocked off-center and was casting a skewed sidelong beam into the woods beside the country highway. Apparently the armor in this "armored truck" referred only to the cargo hold and not the front end.
Sophie sat in the passenger seat, staring blankly at the rosewood box on her lap.
"Are you okay?" Langdon asked.
Sophie looked shaken. "Do you believe him?"
"About the three additional murders? Absolutely. It answers a lot of questions—the issue of your grandfather's desperation to pass on the keystone, as well as the intensity with which Fache is hunting me."
"No, I meant about Vernet trying to protect his bank."
Langdon glanced over. "As opposed to?"
"Taking the keystone for himself."
Langdon had not even considered it. "How would he even know what this box contains?"
"His bank stored it. He knew my grandfather. Maybe he knew things. He might have decided he 

wanted the Grail for himself."
Langdon shook his head. Vernet hardly seemed the type. "In my experience, there are only two reasons people seek the Grail. Either they are naive and believe they are searching for the long-lost Cup of Christ..."
"Or?"
"Or they know the truth and are threatened by it. Many groups throughout history have sought to destroy the Grail."
The silence between them accentuated the sound of the scraping bumper. They had driven a few kilometers now, and as Langdon watched the cascade of sparks coming off the front of the truck, he wondered if it was dangerous. Either way, if they passed another car, it would certainly draw attention. Langdon made up his mind.
"I'm going to see if I can bend this bumper back."
Pulling onto the shoulder, he brought the truck to a stop.
Silence at last.
As Langdon walked toward the front of the truck, he felt surprisingly alert. Staring into the barrel of yet another gun tonight had given him a second wind. He took a deep breath of nighttime air and tried to get his wits about him. Accompanying the gravity of being a hunted man, Langdon was starting to feel the ponderous weight of responsibility, the prospect that he and Sophie might actually be holding an encrypted set of directions to one of the most enduring mysteries of all time.
As if this burden were not great enough, Langdon now realized that any possibility of finding a way to return the keystone to the Priory had just evaporated. News of the three additional murders had dire implications. The Priory has been infiltrated. They are compromised. The brotherhood was obviously being watched, or there was a mole within the ranks. It seemed to explain why Saunière might have transferred the keystone to Sophie and Langdon—people outside the brotherhood, people he knew were not compromised. We can't very well give the keystone back to the brotherhood. Even if Langdon had any idea how to find a Priory member, chances were good that whoever stepped forward to take the keystone could be the enemy himself. For the moment, at least, it seemed the keystone was in Sophie and Langdon's hands, whether they wanted it or not.
The truck's front end looked worse than Langdon had imagined. The left headlight was gone, and the right one looked like an eyeball dangling from its socket. Langdon straightened it, and it dislodged again. The only good news was that the front bumper had been torn almost clean off. Langdon gave it a hard kick and sensed he might be able to break it off entirely.

As he repeatedly kicked the twisted metal, Langdon recalled his earlier conversation with Sophie. My grandfather left me a phone message, Sophie had told him. He said he needed to tell me the truth about my family. At the time it had meant nothing, but now, knowing the Priory of Sion was involved, Langdon felt a startling new possibility emerge.
The bumper broke off suddenly with a crash. Langdon paused to catch his breath. At least the truck would no longer look like a Fourth of July sparkler. He grabbed the bumper and began dragging it out of sight into the woods, wondering where they should go next. They had no idea how to open the cryptex, or why Saunière had given it to them. Unfortunately, their survival tonight seemed to depend on getting answers to those very questions.
We need help, Langdon decided. Professional help.
In the world of the Holy Grail and the Priory of Sion, that meant only one man. The challenge, of course, would be selling the idea to Sophie. 
Inside the armored car, while Sophie waited for Langdon to return, she could feel the weight of the rosewood box on her lap and resented it. Why did my grandfather give this to me? She had not the slightest idea what to do with it.
Think, Sophie! Use your head. Grand-père is trying to tell you something!
Opening the box, she eyed the cryptex's dials. A proof of merit. She could feel her grandfather's hand at work. The keystone is a map that can be followed only by the worthy. It sounded like her grandfather to the core.
Lifting the cryptex out of the box, Sophie ran her fingers over the dials. Five letters. She rotated the dials one by one. The mechanism moved smoothly. She aligned the disks such that her chosen letters lined up between the cryptex's two brass alignment arrows on either end of the cylinder. The dials now spelled a five-letter word that Sophie knew was absurdly obvious.
G-R-A-I-L.
Gently, she held the two ends of the cylinder and pulled, applying pressure slowly. The cryptex didn't budge. She heard the vinegar inside gurgle and stopped pulling. Then she tried again.
V-I-N-C-I
Again, no movement.
V-O-U-T-E

Nothing. The cryptex remained locked solid.
Frowning, she replaced it in the rosewood box and closed the lid. Looking outside at Langdon, Sophie felt grateful he was with her tonight. P.S. Find Robert Langdon. Her grandfather's rationale for including him was now clear. Sophie was not equipped to understand her grandfather's intentions, and so he had assigned Robert Langdon as her guide. A tutor to oversee her education. Unfortunately for Langdon, he had turned out to be far more than a tutor tonight. He had become the target of Bezu Fache... and some unseen force intent on possessing the Holy Grail.
Whatever the Grail turns out to be.
Sophie wondered if finding out was worth her life. 
As the armored truck accelerated again, Langdon was pleased how much more smoothly it drove. "Do you know how to get to Versailles?"
Sophie eyed him. "Sightseeing?"
"No, I have a plan. There's a religious historian I know who lives near Versailles. I can't remember exactly where, but we can look it up. I've been to his estate a few times. His name is Leigh Teabing. He's a former British Royal Historian."
"And he lives in Paris?"
"Teabing's life passion is the Grail. When whisperings of the Priory keystone surfaced about fifteen years ago, he moved to France to search churches in hopes of finding it. He's written some books on the keystone and the Grail. He may be able to help us figure out how to open it and what to do with it."
Sophie's eyes were wary. "Can you trust him?"
"Trust him to what? Not steal the information?"
"And not to turn us in."
"I don't intend to tell him we're wanted by the police. I'm hoping he'll take us in until we can sort all this out."
"Robert, has it occurred to you that every television in France is probably getting ready to broadcast our pictures? Bezu Fache always uses the media to his advantage. He'll make it impossible for us to move around without being recognized."

Terrific, Langdon thought. My French TV debut will be on "Paris's Most Wanted." At least Jonas Faukman would be pleased; every time Langdon made the news, his book sales jumped.
"Is this man a good enough friend?" Sophie asked.
Langdon doubted Teabing was someone who watched television, especially at this hour, but still the question deserved consideration. Instinct told Langdon that Teabing would be totally trustworthy. An ideal safe harbor. Considering the circumstances, Teabing would probably trip over himself to help them as much as possible. Not only did he owe Langdon a favor, but Teabing was a Grail researcher, and Sophie claimed her grandfather was the actual Grand Master of the Priory of Sion. If Teabing heard that, he would salivate at the thought of helping them figure this out.
"Teabing could be a powerful ally," Langdon said. Depending on how much you want to tell him.
"Fache probably will be offering a monetary reward."
Langdon laughed. "Believe me, money is the last thing this guy needs." Leigh Teabing was wealthy in the way small countries were wealthy. A descendant of Britain's First Duke of Lancaster, Teabing had gotten his money the old-fashioned way—he'd inherited it. His estate outside of Paris was a seventeenth-century palace with two private lakes.
Langdon had first met Teabing several years ago through the British Broadcasting Corporation. Teabing had approached the BBC with a proposal for a historical documentary in which he would expose the explosive history of the Holy Grail to a mainstream television audience. The BBC producers loved Teabing's hot premise, his research, and his credentials, but they had concerns that the concept was so shocking and hard to swallow that the network might end up tarnishing its reputation for quality journalism. At Teabing's suggestion, the BBC solved its credibility fears by soliciting three cameos from respected historians from around the world, all of whom corroborated the stunning nature of the Holy Grail secret with their own research.
Langdon had been among those chosen.
The BBC had flown Langdon to Teabing's Paris estate for the filming. He sat before cameras in Teabing's opulent drawing room and shared his story, admitting his initial skepticism on hearing of the alternate Holy Grail story, then describing how years of research had persuaded him that the story was true. Finally, Langdon offered some of his own research—a series of symbologic connections that strongly supported the seemingly controversial claims.
When the program aired in Britain, despite its ensemble cast and well-documented evidence, the premise rubbed so hard against the grain of popular Christian thought that it instantly confronted a firestorm of hostility. It never aired in the States, but the repercussions echoed across the Atlantic. 

Shortly afterward, Langdon received a postcard from an old friend—the Catholic Bishop of Philadelphia. The card simply read: Et tu, Robert?
"Robert," Sophie asked, "you're certain we can trust this man?"
"Absolutely. We're colleagues, he doesn't need money, and I happen to know he despises the French authorities. The French government taxes him at absurd rates because he bought a historic landmark. He'll be in no hurry to cooperate with Fache."
Sophie stared out at the dark roadway. "If we go to him, how much do you want to tell him?"
Langdon looked unconcerned. "Believe me, Leigh Teabing knows more about the Priory of Sion and the Holy Grail than anyone on earth."
Sophie eyed him. "More than my grandfather?"
"I meant more than anyone outside the brotherhood."
"How do you know Teabing isn't a member of the brotherhood?"
"Teabing has spent his life trying to broadcast the truth about the Holy Grail. The Priory's oath is to keep its true nature hidden."
"Sounds to me like a conflict of interest."
Langdon understood her concerns. Saunière had given the cryptex directly to Sophie, and although she didn't know what it contained or what she was supposed to do with it, she was hesitant to involve a total stranger. Considering the information potentially enclosed, the instinct was probably a good one. "We don't need to tell Teabing about the keystone immediately. Or at all, even. His house will give us a place to hide and think, and maybe when we talk to him about the Grail, you'll start to have an idea why your grandfather gave this to you."
"Us," Sophie reminded.
Langdon felt a humble pride and wondered yet again why Saunière had included him.
"Do you know more or less where Mr. Teabing lives?" Sophie asked.
"His estate is called Château Villette."
Sophie turned with an incredulous look. "The Château Villette?"
"That's the one."

"Nice friends."
"You know the estate?"
"I've passed it. It's in the castle district. Twenty minutes from here."
Langdon frowned. "That far?"
"Yes, which will give you enough time to tell me what the Holy Grail really is."
Langdon paused. "I'll tell you at Teabing's. He and I specialize in different areas of the legend, so between the two of us, you'll get the full story." Langdon smiled. "Besides, the Grail has been Teabing's life, and hearing the story of the Holy Grail from Leigh Teabing will be like hearing the theory of relativity from Einstein himself."
"Let's hope Leigh doesn't mind late-night visitors."
"For the record, it's Sir Leigh." Langdon had made that mistake only once. "Teabing is quite a character. He was knighted by the Queen several years back after composing an extensive history on the House of York."
Sophie looked over. "You're kidding, right? We're going to visit a knight?"
Langdon gave an awkward smile. "We're on a Grail quest, Sophie. Who better to help us than a knight?" 
CHAPTER 52
The Sprawling 185-acre estate of Château Villette was located twenty-five minutes northwest of Paris in the environs of Versailles. Designed by François Mansart in 1668 for the Count of Aufflay, it was one of Paris's most significant historical châteaux. Complete with two rectangular lakes and gardens designed by Le Nôtre, Château Villette was more of a modest castle than a mansion. The estate fondly had become known as la Petite Versailles.
Langdon brought the armored truck to a shuddering stop at the foot of the mile-long driveway. Beyond the imposing security gate, Sir Leigh Teabing's residence rose on a meadow in the distance. The sign on the gate was in English: PRIVATE PROPERTY. NO TRESPASSING.
As if to proclaim his home a British Isle unto itself, Teabing had not only posted his signs in English, but he had installed his gate's intercom entry system on the right-hand side of the 

truck—the passenger's side everywhere in Europe except England.
Sophie gave the misplaced intercom an odd look. "And if someone arrives without a passenger?"
"Don't ask." Langdon had already been through that with Teabing. "He prefers things the way they are at home."
Sophie rolled down her window. "Robert, you'd better do the talking."
Langdon shifted his position, leaning out across Sophie to press the intercom button. As he did, an alluring whiff of Sophie's perfume filled his nostrils, and he realized how close they were. He waited there, awkwardly prone, while a telephone began ringing over the small speaker.
Finally, the intercom crackled and an irritated French accent spoke. "Château Villette. Who is calling?"
"This is Robert Langdon," Langdon called out, sprawled across Sophie's lap. "I'm a friend of Sir Leigh Teabing. I need his help."
"My master is sleeping. As was I. What is your business with him?"
"It is a private matter. One of great interest to him."
"Then I'm sure he will be pleased to receive you in the morning."
Langdon shifted his weight. "It's quite important."
"As is Sir Leigh's sleep. If you are a friend, then you are aware he is in poor health."
Sir Leigh Teabing had suffered from polio as a child and now wore leg braces and walked with crutches, but Langdon had found him such a lively and colorful man on his last visit that it hardly seemed an infirmity. "If you would, please tell him I have uncovered new information about the Grail. Information that cannot wait until morning."
There was a long pause.
Langdon and Sophie waited, the truck idling loudly.
A full minute passed.
Finally, someone spoke. "My good man, I daresay you are still on Harvard Standard Time." The voice was crisp and light.

Langdon grinned, recognizing the thick British accent. "Leigh, my apologies for waking you at this obscene hour."
"My manservant tells me that not only are you in Paris, but you speak of the Grail."
"I thought that might get you out of bed."
"And so it has."
"Any chance you'd open the gate for an old friend?"
"Those who seek the truth are more than friends. They are brothers."
Langdon rolled his eyes at Sophie, well accustomed to Teabing's predilection for dramatic antics.
"Indeed I will open the gate," Teabing proclaimed, "but first I must confirm your heart is true. A test of your honor. You will answer three questions."
Langdon groaned, whispering at Sophie. "Bear with me here. As I mentioned, he's something of a character."
"Your first question," Teabing declared, his tone Herculean. "Shall I serve you coffee, or tea?"
Langdon knew Teabing's feelings about the American phenomenon of coffee. "Tea," he replied. "Earl Grey."
"Excellent. Your second question. Milk or sugar?"
Langdon hesitated.
"Milk," Sophie whispered in his ear. "I think the British take milk."
"Milk," Langdon said.
Silence.
"Sugar?"
Teabing made no reply.
Wait! Langdon now recalled the bitter beverage he had been served on his last visit and realized this question was a trick. "Lemon!" he declared. "Earl Grey with lemon"

"Indeed." Teabing sounded deeply amused now. "And finally, I must make the most grave of inquiries." Teabing paused and then spoke in a solemn tone. "In which year did a Harvard sculler last outrow an Oxford man at Henley?"
Langdon had no idea, but he could imagine only one reason the question had been asked. "Surely such a travesty has never occurred."
The gate clicked open. "Your heart is true, my friend. You may pass." 
CHAPTER 53
"Monsieur Vernet!" The night manager of the Depository Bank of Zurich felt relieved to hear the bank president's voice on the phone. "Where did you go, sir? The police are here, everyone is waiting for you!"
"I have a little problem," the bank president said, sounding distressed. "I need your help right away."
You have more than a little problem, the manager thought. The police had entirely surrounded the bank and were threatening to have the DCPJ captain himself show up with the warrant the bank had demanded. "How can I help you, sir?"
"Armored truck number three. I need to find it."
Puzzled, the manager checked his delivery schedule. "It's here. Downstairs at the loading dock."
"Actually, no. The truck was stolen by the two individuals the police are tracking."
"What? How did they drive out?"
"I can't go into the specifics on the phone, but we have a situation here that could potentially be extremely unfortunate for the bank."
"What do you need me to do, sir?"
"I'd like you to activate the truck's emergency transponder."
The night manager's eyes moved to the LoJack control box across the room. Like many armored cars, each of the bank's trucks had been equipped with a radio-controlled homing device, which could be activated remotely from the bank. The manager had only used the emergency system once, after a hijacking, and it had worked flawlessly—locating the truck and transmitting the 

coordinates to the authorities automatically. Tonight, however, the manager had the impression the president was hoping for a bit more prudence. "Sir, you are aware that if I activate the LoJack system, the transponder will simultaneously inform the authorities that we have a problem."
Vernet was silent for several seconds. "Yes, I know. Do it anyway. Truck number three. I'll hold. I need the exact location of that truck the instant you have it."
"Right away, sir." 
Thirty seconds later, forty kilometers away, hidden in the undercarriage of the armored truck, a tiny transponder blinked to life. 
CHAPTER 54
As Langdon and Sophie drove the armored truck up the winding, poplar-lined driveway toward the house, Sophie could already feel her muscles relaxing. It was a relief to be off the road, and she could think of few safer places to get their feet under them than this private, gated estate owned by a good-natured foreigner.
They turned into the sweeping circular driveway, and Château Villette came into view on their right. Three stories tall and at least sixty meters long, the edifice had gray stone facing illuminated by outside spotlights. The coarse facade stood in stark juxtaposition to the immaculately landscaped gardens and glassy pond.
The inside lights were just now coming on.
Rather than driving to the front door, Langdon pulled into a parking area nestled in the evergreens. "No reason to risk being spotted from the road," he said. "Or having Leigh wonder why we arrived in a wrecked armored truck."
Sophie nodded. "What do we do with the cryptex? We probably shouldn't leave it out here, but if Leigh sees it, he'll certainly want to know what it is."
"Not to worry," Langdon said, removing his jacket as he stepped out of the car. He wrapped the tweed coat around the box and held the bundle in his arms like a baby.
Sophie looked dubious. "Subtle."

"Teabing never answers his own door; he prefers to make an entrance. I'll find somewhere inside to stash this before he joins us." Langdon paused. "Actually, I should probably warn you before you meet him. Sir Leigh has a sense of humor that people often find a bit... strange."
Sophie doubted anything tonight would strike her as strange anymore.
The pathway to the main entrance was hand-laid cobblestone. It curved to a door of carved oak and cherry with a brass knocker the size of a grapefruit. Before Sophie could grasp the knocker, the door swung open from within.
A prim and elegant butler stood before them, making final adjustments on the white tie and tuxedo he had apparently just donned. He looked to be about fifty, with refined features and an austere expression that left little doubt he was unamused by their presence here.
"Sir Leigh will be down presently," he declared, his accent thick French. "He is dressing. He prefers not to greet visitors while wearing only a nightshirt. May I take your coat?" He scowled at the bunched-up tweed in Langdon's arms.
"Thank you, I'm fine."
"Of course you are. Right this way, please."
The butler guided them through a lush marble foyer into an exquisitely adorned drawing room, softly lit by tassel-draped Victorian lamps. The air inside smelled antediluvian, regal somehow, with traces of pipe tobacco, tea leaves, cooking sherry, and the earthen aroma of stone architecture. Against the far wall, flanked between two glistening suits of chain mail armor, was a rough-hewn fireplace large enough to roast an ox. Walking to the hearth, the butler knelt and touched a match to a pre-laid arrangement of oak logs and kindling. A fire quickly crackled to life.
The man stood, straightening his jacket. "His master requests that you make yourselves at home." With that, he departed, leaving Langdon and Sophie alone.
Sophie wondered which of the fireside antiques she was supposed to sit on—the Renaissance velvet divan, the rustic eagle-claw rocker, or the pair of stone pews that looked like they'd been lifted from some Byzantine temple.
Langdon unwrapped the cryptex from his coat, walked to the velvet divan, and slid the wooden box deep underneath it, well out of sight. Then, shaking out his jacket, he put it back on, smoothed the lapels, and smiled at Sophie as he sat down directly over the stashed treasure.
The divan it is, Sophie thought, taking a seat beside him.
As she stared into the growing fire, enjoying the warmth, Sophie had the sensation that her 

grandfather would have loved this room. The dark wood paneling was bedecked with Old Master paintings, one of which Sophie recognized as a Poussin, her grandfather's second-favorite painter. On the mantel above the fireplace, an alabaster bust of Isis watched over the room.
Beneath the Egyptian goddess, inside the fireplace, two stone gargoyles served as andirons, their mouths gaping to reveal their menacing hollow throats. Gargoyles had always terrified Sophie as a child; that was, until her grandfather cured her of the fear by taking her atop Notre Dame Cathedral in a rainstorm. "Princess, look at these silly creatures," he had told her, pointing to the gargoyle rainspouts with their mouths gushing water. "Do you hear that funny sound in their throats?" Sophie nodded, having to smile at the burping sound of the water gurgling through their throats. "They're gargling," her grandfather told her. "Gargariser! And that's where they get the silly name 'gargoyles.' " Sophie had never again been afraid.
The fond memory caused Sophie a pang of sadness as the harsh reality of the murder gripped her again. Grand-père is gone. She pictured the cryptex under the divan and wondered if Leigh Teabing would have any idea how to open it. Or if we even should ask him. Sophie's grandfather's final words had instructed her to find Robert Langdon. He had said nothing about involving anyone else. We needed somewhere to hide, Sophie said, deciding to trust Robert's judgment.
"Sir Robert!" a voice bellowed somewhere behind them. "I see you travel with a maiden."
Langdon stood up. Sophie jumped to her feet as well. The voice had come from the top of a curled staircase that snaked up to the shadows of the second floor. At the top of the stairs, a form moved in the shadows, only his silhouette visible.
"Good evening," Langdon called up. "Sir Leigh, may I present Sophie Neveu."
"An honor." Teabing moved into the light.
"Thank you for having us," Sophie said, now seeing the man wore metal leg braces and used crutches. He was coming down one stair at a time. "I realize it's quite late."
"It is so late, my dear, it's early." He laughed. "Vous n'êtes pas Américaine?"
Sophie shook her head. "Parisienne."
"Your English is superb."
"Thank you. I studied at the Royal Holloway."
"So then, that explains it." Teabing hobbled lower through the shadows. "Perhaps Robert told you I schooled just down the road at Oxford." Teabing fixed Langdon with a devilish smile. "Of course, I also applied to Harvard as my safety school."

Their host arrived at the bottom of the stairs, appearing to Sophie no more like a knight than Sir Elton John. Portly and ruby-faced, Sir Leigh Teabing had bushy red hair and jovial hazel eyes that seemed to twinkle as he spoke. He wore pleated pants and a roomy silk shirt under a paisley vest. Despite the aluminum braces on his legs, he carried himself with a resilient, vertical dignity that seemed more a by-product of noble ancestry than any kind of conscious effort.
Teabing arrived and extended a hand to Langdon. "Robert, you've lost weight."
Langdon grinned. "And you've found some."
Teabing laughed heartily, patting his rotund belly. "Touché. My only carnal pleasures these days seem to be culinary." Turning now to Sophie, he gently took her hand, bowing his head slightly, breathing lightly on her fingers, and diverting his eyes. "M'lady."
Sophie glanced at Langdon, uncertain whether she'd stepped back in time or into a nuthouse.
The butler who had answered the door now entered carrying a tea service, which he arranged on a table in front of the fireplace.
"This is Rémy Legaludec," Teabing said, "my manservant."
The slender butler gave a stiff nod and disappeared yet again.
"Rémy is Lyonais," Teabing whispered, as if it were an unfortunate disease. "But he does sauces quite nicely."
Langdon looked amused. "I would have thought you'd import an English staff?"
"Good heavens, no! I would not wish a British chef on anyone except the French tax collectors." He glanced over at Sophie. "Pardonnez-moi, Mademoiselle Neveu. Please be assured that my distaste for the French extends only to politics and the soccer pitch. Your government steals my money, and your football squad recently humiliated us."
Sophie offered an easy smile.
Teabing eyed her a moment and then looked at Langdon. "Something has happened. You both look shaken."
Langdon nodded. "We've had an interesting night, Leigh."
"No doubt. You arrive on my doorstep unannounced in the middle of the night speaking of the Grail. Tell me, is this indeed about the Grail, or did you simply say that because you know it is the lone topic for which I would rouse myself in the middle of the night?"

A little of both, Sophie thought, picturing the cryptex hidden beneath the couch.
"Leigh," Langdon said, "we'd like to talk to you about the Priory of Sion."
Teabing's bushy eyebrows arched with intrigue. "The keepers. So this is indeed about the Grail. You say you come with information? Something new, Robert?"
"Perhaps. We're not quite sure. We might have a better idea if we could get some information from you first."
Teabing wagged his finger. "Ever the wily American. A game of quid pro quo. Very well. I am at your service. What is it I can tell you?"
Langdon sighed. "I was hoping you would be kind enough to explain to Ms. Neveu the true nature of the Holy Grail."
Teabing looked stunned. "She doesn't know?"
Langdon shook his head.
The smile that grew on Teabing's face was almost obscene. "Robert, you've brought me a virgin?"
Langdon winced, glancing at Sophie. "Virgin is the term Grail enthusiasts use to describe anyone who has never heard the true Grail story."
Teabing turned eagerly to Sophie. "How much do you know, my dear?"
Sophie quickly outlined what Langdon had explained earlier—the Priory of Sion, the Knights Templar, the Sangreal documents, and the Holy Grail, which many claimed was not a cup... but rather something far more powerful.
"That's all?" Teabing fired Langdon a scandalous look. "Robert, I thought you were a gentleman. You've robbed her of the climax!"
"I know, I thought perhaps you and I could..." Langdon apparently decided the unseemly metaphor had gone far enough.
Teabing already had Sophie locked in his twinkling gaze. "You are a Grail virgin, my dear. And trust me, you will never forget your first time."

CHAPTER 55
Seated on the divan beside Langdon, Sophie drank her tea and ate a scone, feeling the welcome effects of caffeine and food. Sir Leigh Teabing was beaming as he awkwardly paced before the open fire, his leg braces clicking on the stone hearth.
"The Holy Grail," Teabing said, his voice sermonic. "Most people ask me only where it is. I fear that is a question I may never answer." He turned and looked directly at Sophie. "However... the far more relevant question is this: What is the Holy Grail?"
Sophie sensed a rising air of academic anticipation now in both of her male companions.
"To fully understand the Grail," Teabing continued, "we must first understand the Bible. How well do you know the New Testament?"
Sophie shrugged. "Not at all, really. I was raised by a man who worshipped Leonardo da Vinci."
Teabing looked both startled and pleased. "An enlightened soul. Superb! Then you must be aware that Leonardo was one of the keepers of the secret of the Holy Grail. And he hid clues in his art."
"Robert told me as much, yes."
"And Da Vinci's views on the New Testament?"
"I have no idea."
Teabing's eyes turned mirthful as he motioned to the bookshelf across the room. "Robert, would you mind? On the bottom shelf. La Storia di Leonardo."
Langdon went across the room, found a large art book, and brought it back, setting it down on the table between them. Twisting the book to face Sophie, Teabing flipped open the heavy cover and pointed inside the rear cover to a series of quotations. "From Da Vinci's notebook on polemics and speculation," Teabing said, indicating one quote in particular. "I think you'll find this relevant to our discussion."
Sophie read the words.
Many have made a trade of delusions
and false miracles, deceiving the stupid multitude.
—LEONARDO DA VINCI 
"Here's another," Teabing said, pointing to a different quote.

Blinding ignorance does mislead us.
O! Wretched mortals, open your eyes!
—LEONARDO DA VINCI 
Sophie felt a little chill. "Da Vinci is talking about the Bible?"
Teabing nodded. "Leonardo's feelings about the Bible relate directly to the Holy Grail. In fact, Da Vinci painted the true Grail, which I will show you momentarily, but first we must speak of the Bible." Teabing smiled. "And everything you need to know about the Bible can be summed up by the great canon doctor Martyn Percy." Teabing cleared his throat and declared, "The Bible did not arrive by fax from heaven."
"I beg your pardon?"
"The Bible is a product of man, my dear. Not of God. The Bible did not fall magically from the clouds. Man created it as a historical record of tumultuous times, and it has evolved through countless translations, additions, and revisions. History has never had a definitive version of the book."
"Okay."
"Jesus Christ was a historical figure of staggering influence, perhaps the most enigmatic and inspirational leader the world has ever seen. As the prophesied Messiah, Jesus toppled kings, inspired millions, and founded new philosophies. As a descendant of the lines of King Solomon and King David, Jesus possessed a rightful claim to the throne of the King of the Jews. Understandably, His life was recorded by thousands of followers across the land." Teabing paused to sip his tea and then placed the cup back on the mantel. "More than eighty gospels were considered for the New Testament, and yet only a relative few were chosen for inclusion—Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John among them.
"Who chose which gospels to include?" Sophie asked.
"Aha!" Teabing burst in with enthusiasm. "The fundamental irony of Christianity! The Bible, as we know it today, was collated by the pagan Roman emperor Constantine the Great."
"I thought Constantine was a Christian," Sophie said.
"Hardly," Teabing scoffed. "He was a lifelong pagan who was baptized on his deathbed, too weak to protest. In Constantine's day, Rome's official religion was sun worship—the cult of Sol Invictus, or the Invincible Sun—and Constantine was its head priest. Unfortunately for him, a growing religious turmoil was gripping Rome. Three centuries after the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, Christ's 

followers had multiplied exponentially. Christians and pagans began warring, and the conflict grew to such proportions that it threatened to rend Rome in two. Constantine decided something had to be done. In 325 A.D., he decided to unify Rome under a single religion. Christianity."
Sophie was surprised. "Why would a pagan emperor choose Christianity as the official religion?"
Teabing chuckled. "Constantine was a very good businessman. He could see that Christianity was on the rise, and he simply backed the winning horse. Historians still marvel at the brilliance with which Constantine converted the sun-worshipping pagans to Christianity. By fusing pagan symbols, dates, and rituals into the growing Christian tradition, he created a kind of hybrid religion that was acceptable to both parties."
"Transmogrification," Langdon said. "The vestiges of pagan religion in Christian symbology are undeniable. Egyptian sun disks became the halos of Catholic saints. Pictograms of Isis nursing her miraculously conceived son Horus became the blueprint for our modern images of the Virgin Mary nursing Baby Jesus. And virtually all the elements of the Catholic ritual—the miter, the altar, the doxology, and communion, the act of "God-eating"—were taken directly from earlier pagan mystery religions."
Teabing groaned. "Don't get a symbologist started on Christian icons. Nothing in Christianity is original. The pre-Christian God Mithras—called the Son of God and the Light of the World—was born on December 25, died, was buried in a rock tomb, and then resurrected in three days. By the way, December 25 is also the birthday of Osiris, Adonis, and Dionysus. The newborn Krishna was presented with gold, frankincense, and myrrh. Even Christianity's weekly holy day was stolen from the pagans."
"What do you mean?"
"Originally," Langdon said, "Christianity honored the Jewish Sabbath of Saturday, but Constantine shifted it to coincide with the pagan's veneration day of the sun." He paused, grinning. "To this day, most churchgoers attend services on Sunday morning with no idea that they are there on account of the pagan sun god's weekly tribute—Sunday."
Sophie's head was spinning. "And all of this relates to the Grail?"
"Indeed," Teabing said. "Stay with me. During this fusion of religions, Constantine needed to strengthen the new Christian tradition, and held a famous ecumenical gathering known as the Council of Nicaea."
Sophie had heard of it only insofar as its being the birthplace of the Nicene Creed.
"At this gathering," Teabing said, "many aspects of Christianity were debated and voted upon—the date of Easter, the role of the bishops, the administration of sacraments, and, of course, the divinity

of Jesus."
"I don't follow. His divinity?"
"My dear," Teabing declared, "until that moment in history, Jesus was viewed by His followers as a mortal prophet... a great and powerful man, but a man nonetheless. A mortal."
"Not the Son of God?"
"Right," Teabing said. "Jesus' establishment as 'the Son of God' was officially proposed and voted on by the Council of Nicaea."
"Hold on. You're saying Jesus' divinity was the result of a vote?"
"A relatively close vote at that," Teabing added. "Nonetheless, establishing Christ's divinity was critical to the further unification of the Roman empire and to the new Vatican power base. By officially endorsing Jesus as the Son of God, Constantine turned Jesus into a deity who existed beyond the scope of the human world, an entity whose power was unchallengeable. This not only precluded further pagan challenges to Christianity, but now the followers of Christ were able to redeem themselves only via the established sacred channel—the Roman Catholic Church."
Sophie glanced at Langdon, and he gave her a soft nod of concurrence.
"It was all about power," Teabing continued. "Christ as Messiah was critical to the functioning of Church and state. Many scholars claim that the early Church literally stole Jesus from His original followers, hijacking His human message, shrouding it in an impenetrable cloak of divinity, and using it to expand their own power. I've written several books on the topic."
"And I assume devout Christians send you hate mail on a daily basis?"
"Why would they?" Teabing countered. "The vast majority of educated Christians know the history of their faith. Jesus was indeed a great and powerful man. Constantine's underhanded political maneuvers don't diminish the majesty of Christ's life. Nobody is saying Christ was a fraud, or denying that He walked the earth and inspired millions to better lives. All we are saying is that Constantine took advantage of Christ's substantial influence and importance. And in doing so, he shaped the face of Christianity as we know it today."
Sophie glanced at the art book before her, eager to move on and see the Da Vinci painting of the Holy Grail.
"The twist is this," Teabing said, talking faster now. "Because Constantine upgraded Jesus' status almost four centuries after Jesus' death, thousands of documents already existed chronicling His life as a mortal man. To rewrite the history books, Constantine knew he would need a bold stroke. 

From this sprang the most profound moment in Christian history." Teabing paused, eyeing Sophie. "Constantine commissioned and financed a new Bible, which omitted those gospels that spoke of Christ's human traits and embellished those gospels that made Him godlike. The earlier gospels were outlawed, gathered up, and burned."
"An interesting note," Langdon added. "Anyone who chose the forbidden gospels over Constantine's version was deemed a heretic. The word heretic derives from that moment in history. The Latin word haereticus means 'choice.' Those who 'chose' the original history of Christ were the world's first heretics."
"Fortunately for historians," Teabing said, "some of the gospels that Constantine attempted to eradicate managed to survive. The Dead Sea Scrolls were found in the 1950s hidden in a cave near Qumran in the Judean desert. And, of course, the Coptic Scrolls in 1945 at Nag Hammadi. In addition to telling the true Grail story, these documents speak of Christ's ministry in very human terms. Of course, the Vatican, in keeping with their tradition of misinformation, tried very hard to suppress the release of these scrolls. And why wouldn't they? The scrolls highlight glaring historical discrepancies and fabrications, clearly confirming that the modern Bible was compiled and edited by men who possessed a political agenda—to promote the divinity of the man Jesus Christ and use His influence to solidify their own power base."
"And yet," Langdon countered, "it's important to remember that the modern Church's desire to suppress these documents comes from a sincere belief in their established view of Christ. The Vatican is made up of deeply pious men who truly believe these contrary documents could only be false testimony."
Teabing chuckled as he eased himself into a chair opposite Sophie. "As you can see, our professor has a far softer heart for Rome than I do. Nonetheless, he is correct about the modern clergy believing these opposing documents are false testimony. That's understandable. Constantine's Bible has been their truth for ages. Nobody is more indoctrinated than the indoctrinator."
"What he means," Langdon said, "is that we worship the gods of our fathers."
"What I mean," Teabing countered, "is that almost everything our fathers taught us about Christ is false. As are the stories about the Holy Grail."
Sophie looked again at the Da Vinci quote before her. Blinding ignorance does mislead us. O! Wretched mortals, open your eyes!
Teabing reached for the book and flipped toward the center. "And finally, before I show you Da Vinci's paintings of the Holy Grail, I'd like you to take a quick look at this." He opened the book to a colorful graphic that spanned both full pages. "I assume you recognize this fresco?"
He's kidding, right? Sophie was staring at the most famous fresco of all time—The Last 

Supper—Da Vinci's legendary painting from the wall of Santa Maria delle Grazie near Milan. The decaying fresco portrayed Jesus and His disciples at the moment that Jesus announced one of them would betray Him. "I know the fresco, yes."
"Then perhaps you would indulge me this little game? Close your eyes if you would."
Uncertain, Sophie closed her eyes.
"Where is Jesus sitting?" Teabing asked.
"In the center."
"Good. And what food are He and His disciples breaking and eating?"
"Bread." Obviously.
"Superb. And what drink?"
"Wine. They drank wine."
"Great. And one final question. How many wineglasses are on the table?"
Sophie paused, realizing it was the trick question. And after dinner, Jesus took the cup of wine, sharing it with His disciples. "One cup," she said. "The chalice." The Cup of Christ. The Holy Grail. "Jesus passed a single chalice of wine, just as modern Christians do at communion."
Teabing sighed. "Open your eyes."
She did. Teabing was grinning smugly. Sophie looked down at the painting, seeing to her astonishment that everyone at the table had a glass of wine, including Christ. Thirteen cups. Moreover, the cups were tiny, stemless, and made of glass. There was no chalice in the painting. No Holy Grail.
Teabing's eyes twinkled. "A bit strange, don't you think, considering that both the Bible and our standard Grail legend celebrate this moment as the definitive arrival of the Holy Grail. Oddly, Da Vinci appears to have forgotten to paint the Cup of Christ."
"Surely art scholars must have noted that."
"You will be shocked to learn what anomalies Da Vinci included here that most scholars either do not see or simply choose to ignore. This fresco, in fact, is the entire key to the Holy Grail mystery. Da Vinci lays it all out in the open in The Last Supper"

Sophie scanned the work eagerly. "Does this fresco tell us what the Grail really is?"
"Not what it is," Teabing whispered. "But rather who it is. The Holy Grail is not a thing. It is, in fact... a person" 
CHAPTER 56
Sophie stared at Teabing a long moment and then turned to Langdon. "The Holy Grail is a person?"
Langdon nodded. "A woman, in fact." From the blank look on Sophie's face, Langdon could tell they had already lost her. He recalled having a similar reaction the first time he heard the statement. It was not until he understood the symbology behind the Grail that the feminine connection became clear.
Teabing apparently had a similar thought. "Robert, perhaps this is the moment for the symbologist to clarify?" He went to a nearby end table, found a piece of paper, and laid it in front of Langdon.
Langdon pulled a pen from his pocket. "Sophie, are you familiar with the modern icons for male and female?" He drew the common male symbol and female symbol .
"Of course," she said.
"These," he said quietly, "are not the original symbols for male and female. Many people incorrectly assume the male symbol is derived from a shield and spear, while the female symbol represents a mirror reflecting beauty. In fact, the symbols originated as ancient astronomical symbols for the planet-god Mars and planet-goddess Venus. The original symbols are far simpler." Langdon drew another icon on the paper. 
"This symbol is the original icon for male," he told her. "A rudimentary phallus."
"Quite to the point," Sophie said.
"As it were," Teabing added.
Langdon went on. "This icon is formally known as the blade, and it represents aggression and manhood. In fact, this exact phallus symbol is still used today on modern military uniforms to denote rank."

"Indeed." Teabing grinned. "The more penises you have, the higher your rank. Boys will be boys."
Langdon winced. "Moving on, the female symbol, as you might imagine, is the exact opposite." He drew another symbol on the page. "This is called the chalice." 
Sophie glanced up, looking surprised.
Langdon could see she had made the connection. "The chalice," he said, "resembles a cup or vessel, and more important, it resembles the shape of a woman's womb. This symbol communicates femininity, womanhood, and fertility." Langdon looked directly at her now. "Sophie, legend tells us the Holy Grail is a chalice—a cup. But the Grail's description as a chalice is actually an allegory to protect the true nature of the Holy Grail. That is to say, the legend uses the chalice as a metaphor for something far more important."
"A woman," Sophie said.
"Exactly." Langdon smiled. "The Grail is literally the ancient symbol for womanhood, and the Holy Grail represents the sacred feminine and the goddess, which of course has now been lost, virtually eliminated by the Church. The power of the female and her ability to produce life was once very sacred, but it posed a threat to the rise of the predominantly male Church, and so the sacred feminine was demonized and called unclean. It was man, not God, who created the concept of 'original sin,' whereby Eve tasted of the apple and caused the downfall of the human race. Woman, once the sacred giver of life, was now the enemy."
"I should add," Teabing chimed, "that this concept of woman as life-bringer was the foundation of ancient religion. Childbirth was mystical and powerful. Sadly, Christian philosophy decided to embezzle the female's creative power by ignoring biological truth and making man the Creator. Genesis tells us that Eve was created from Adam's rib. Woman became an offshoot of man. And a sinful one at that. Genesis was the beginning of the end for the goddess."
"The Grail," Langdon said, "is symbolic of the lost goddess. When Christianity came along, the old pagan religions did not die easily. Legends of chivalric quests for the lost Grail were in fact stories of forbidden quests to find the lost sacred feminine. Knights who claimed to be "searching for the chalice" were speaking in code as a way to protect themselves from a Church that had subjugated women, banished the Goddess, burned nonbelievers, and forbidden the pagan reverence for the sacred feminine."
Sophie shook her head. "I'm sorry, when you said the Holy Grail was a person, I thought you meant it was an actual person."

"It is," Langdon said.
"And not just any person," Teabing blurted, clambering excitedly to his feet. "A woman who carried with her a secret so powerful that, if revealed, it threatened to devastate the very foundation of Christianity!"
Sophie looked overwhelmed. "Is this woman well known in history?"
"Quite." Teabing collected his crutches and motioned down the hall. "And if we adjourn to the study, my friends, it would be my honor to show you Da Vinci's painting of her." 
Two rooms away, in the kitchen, manservant Rémy Legaludec stood in silence before a television. The news station was broadcasting photos of a man and woman... the same two individuals to whom Rémy had just served tea. 
CHAPTER 57
Standing at the roadblock outside the Depository Bank of Zurich, Lieutenant Collet wondered what was taking Fache so long to come up with the search warrant. The bankers were obviously hiding something. They claimed Langdon and Neveu had arrived earlier and were turned away from the bank because they did not have proper account identification.
So why won't they let us inside for a look?
Finally, Collet's cellular phone rang. It was the command post at the Louvre. "Do we have a search warrant yet?" Collet demanded.
"Forget about the bank, Lieutenant," the agent told him. "We just got a tip. We have the exact location where Langdon and Neveu are hiding."
Collet sat down hard on the hood of his car. "You're kidding."
"I have an address in the suburbs. Somewhere near Versailles."
"Does Captain Fache know?"
"Not yet. He's busy on an important call."

"I'm on my way. Have him call as soon as he's free." Collet took down the address and jumped in his car. As he peeled away from the bank, Collet realized he had forgotten to ask who had tipped DCPJ off to Langdon's location. Not that it mattered. Collet had been blessed with a chance to redeem his skepticism and earlier blunders. He was about to make the most high-profile arrest of his career.
Collet radioed the five cars accompanying him. "No sirens, men. Langdon can't know we're coming." 
Forty kilometers away, a black Audi pulled off a rural road and parked in the shadows on the edge of a field. Silas got out and peered through the rungs of the wrought-iron fence that encircled the vast compound before him. He gazed up the long moonlit slope to the château in the distance.
The downstairs lights were all ablaze. Odd for this hour, Silas thought, smiling. The information the Teacher had given him was obviously accurate. I will not leave this house without the keystone, he vowed. I will not fail the bishop and the Teacher.
Checking the thirteen-round clip in his Heckler Koch, Silas pushed it through the bars and let it fall onto the mossy ground inside the compound. Then, gripping the top of the fence, he heaved himself up and over, dropping to the ground on the other side. Ignoring the slash of pain from his cilice, Silas retrieved his gun and began the long trek up the grassy slope. 
CHAPTER 58
Teabing's "study" was like no study Sophie had ever seen. Six or seven times larger than even the most luxurious of office spaces, the knight's cabinet de travail resembled an ungainly hybrid of science laboratory, archival library, and indoor flea market. Lit by three overhead chandeliers, the boundless tile floor was dotted with clustered islands of worktables buried beneath books, artwork, artifacts, and a surprising amount of electronic gear—computers, projectors, microscopes, copy machines, and flatbed scanners.
"I converted the ballroom," Teabing said, looking sheepish as he shuffled into the room. "I have little occasion to dance."
Sophie felt as if the entire night had become some kind of twilight zone where nothing was as she expected. "This is all for your work?"
"Learning the truth has become my life's love," Teabing said. "And the Sangreal is my favorite mistress."

The Holy Grail is a woman, Sophie thought, her mind a collage of interrelated ideas that seemed to make no sense. "You said you have a picture of this woman who you claim is the Holy Grail."
"Yes, but it is not I who claim she is the Grail. Christ Himself made that claim."
"Which one is the painting?" Sophie asked, scanning the walls.
"Hmmm..." Teabing made a show of seeming to have forgotten. "The Holy Grail. The Sangreal. The Chalice." He wheeled suddenly and pointed to the far wall. On it hung an eight-foot-long print of The Last Supper, the same exact image Sophie had just been looking at. "There she is!"
Sophie was certain she had missed something. "That's the same painting you just showed me."
He winked. "I know, but the enlargement is so much more exciting. Don't you think?"
Sophie turned to Langdon for help. "I'm lost."
Langdon smiled. "As it turns out, the Holy Grail does indeed make an appearance in The Last Supper. Leonardo included her prominently."
"Hold on," Sophie said. "You told me the Holy Grail is a woman. The Last Supper is a painting of thirteen men."
"Is it?" Teabing arched his eyebrows. "Take a closer look."
Uncertain, Sophie made her way closer to the painting, scanning the thirteen figures—Jesus Christ in the middle, six disciples on His left, and six on His right. "They're all men," she confirmed.
"Oh?" Teabing said. "How about the one seated in the place of honor, at the right hand of the Lord?"
Sophie examined the figure to Jesus' immediate right, focusing in. As she studied the person's face and body, a wave of astonishment rose within her. The individual had flowing red hair, delicate folded hands, and the hint of a bosom. It was, without a doubt... female.
"That's a woman!" Sophie exclaimed.
Teabing was laughing. "Surprise, surprise. Believe me, it's no mistake. Leonardo was skilled at painting the difference between the sexes."
Sophie could not take her eyes from the woman beside Christ. The Last Supper is supposed to be thirteen men. Who is this woman? Although Sophie had seen this classic image many times, she 

had not once noticed this glaring discrepancy.
"Everyone misses it," Teabing said. "Our preconceived notions of this scene are so powerful that our mind blocks out the incongruity and overrides our eyes."
"It's known as skitoma," Langdon added. "The brain does it sometimes with powerful symbols."
"Another reason you might have missed the woman," Teabing said, "is that many of the photographs in art books were taken before 1954, when the details were still hidden beneath layers of grime and several restorative repaintings done by clumsy hands in the eighteenth century. Now, at last, the fresco has been cleaned down to Da Vinci's original layer of paint." He motioned to the photograph. "Et voilà!"
Sophie moved closer to the image. The woman to Jesus' right was young and pious-looking, with a demure face, beautiful red hair, and hands folded quietly. This is the woman who singlehandedly could crumble the Church?
"Who is she?" Sophie asked.
"That, my dear," Teabing replied, "is Mary Magdalene."
Sophie turned. "The prostitute?"
Teabing drew a short breath, as if the word had injured him personally. "Magdalene was no such thing. That unfortunate misconception is the legacy of a smear campaign launched by the early Church. The Church needed to defame Mary Magdalene in order to cover up her dangerous secret—her role as the Holy Grail."
"Her role?"
"As I mentioned," Teabing clarified, "the early Church needed to convince the world that the mortal prophet Jesus was a divine being. Therefore, any gospels that described earthly aspects of Jesus' life had to be omitted from the Bible. Unfortunately for the early editors, one particularly troubling earthly theme kept recurring in the gospels. Mary Magdalene." He paused. "More specifically, her marriage to Jesus Christ."
"I beg your pardon?" Sophie's eyes moved to Langdon and then back to Teabing.
"It's a matter of historical record," Teabing said, "and Da Vinci was certainly aware of that fact. The Last Supper practically shouts at the viewer that Jesus and Magdalene were a pair."
Sophie glanced back to the fresco.

"Notice that Jesus and Magdalene are clothed as mirror images of one another." Teabing pointed to the two individuals in the center of the fresco.
Sophie was mesmerized. Sure enough, their clothes were inverse colors. Jesus wore a red robe and blue cloak; Mary Magdalene wore a blue robe and red cloak. Yin and yang.
"Venturing into the more bizarre," Teabing said, "note that Jesus and His bride appear to be joined at the hip and are leaning away from one another as if to create this clearly delineated negative space between them."
Even before Teabing traced the contour for her, Sophie saw it—the indisputable V shape at the focal point of the painting. It was the same symbol Langdon had drawn earlier for the Grail, the chalice, and the female womb.
"Finally," Teabing said, "if you view Jesus and Magdalene as compositional elements rather than as people, you will see another obvious shape leap out at you." He paused. "A letter of the alphabet."
Sophie saw it at once. To say the letter leapt out at her was an understatement. The letter was suddenly all Sophie could see. Glaring in the center of the painting was the unquestionable outline of an enormous, flawlessly formed letter M.
"A bit too perfect for coincidence, wouldn't you say?" Teabing asked.
Sophie was amazed. "Why is it there?"
Teabing shrugged. "Conspiracy theorists will tell you it stands for Matrimonio or Mary Magdalene. To be honest, nobody is certain. The only certainty is that the hidden M is no mistake. Countless Grail-related works contain the hidden letter M—whether as watermarks, underpaintings, or compositional allusions. The most blatant M, of course, is emblazoned on the altar at Our Lady of Paris in London, which was designed by a former Grand Master of the Priory of Sion, Jean Cocteau."
Sophie weighed the information. "I'll admit, the hidden M's are intriguing, although I assume nobody is claiming they are proof of Jesus' marriage to Magdalene."
"No, no," Teabing said, going to a nearby table of books. "As I said earlier, the marriage of Jesus and Mary Magdalene is part of the historical record." He began pawing through his book collection. "Moreover, Jesus as a married man makes infinitely more sense than our standard biblical view of Jesus as a bachelor."
"Why?" Sophie asked.

"Because Jesus was a Jew," Langdon said, taking over while Teabing searched for his book, "and the social decorum during that time virtually forbid a Jewish man to be unmarried. According to Jewish custom, celibacy was condemned, and the obligation for a Jewish father was to find a suitable wife for his son. If Jesus were not married, at least one of the Bible's gospels would have mentioned it and offered some explanation for His unnatural state of bachelorhood."
Teabing located a huge book and pulled it toward him across the table. The leather-bound edition was poster-sized, like a huge atlas. The cover read: The Gnostic Gospels. Teabing heaved it open, and Langdon and Sophie joined him. Sophie could see it contained photographs of what appeared to be magnified passages of ancient documents—tattered papyrus with handwritten text. She did not recognize the ancient language, but the facing pages bore typed translations.
"These are photocopies of the Nag Hammadi and Dead Sea scrolls, which I mentioned earlier," Teabing said. "The earliest Christian records. Troublingly, they do not match up with the gospels in the Bible." Flipping toward the middle of the book, Teabing pointed to a passage. "The Gospel of Philip is always a good place to start." Sophie read the passage:
And the companion of the Saviour is Mary Magdalene. Christ loved her more than all the disciples and used to kiss her often on her mouth. The rest of the disciples were offended by it and expressed disapproval. They said to him, "Why do you love her more than all of us?"
The words surprised Sophie, and yet they hardly seemed conclusive. "It says nothing of marriage."
"Au contraire." Teabing smiled, pointing to the first line. "As any Aramaic scholar will tell you, the word companion, in those days, literally meant spouse."
Langdon concurred with a nod.
Sophie read the first line again. And the companion of the Saviour is Mary Magdalene.
Teabing flipped through the book and pointed out several other passages that, to Sophie's surprise, clearly suggested Magdalene and Jesus had a romantic relationship. As she read the passages, Sophie recalled an angry priest who had banged on her grandfather's door when she was a schoolgirl.
"Is this the home of Jacques Saunière?" the priest had demanded, glaring down at young Sophie when she pulled open the door. "I want to talk to him about this editorial he wrote." The priest held up a newspaper.
Sophie summoned her grandfather, and the two men disappeared into his study and closed the door. My grandfather wrote something in the paper? Sophie immediately ran to the kitchen and flipped through that morning's paper. She found her grandfather's name on an article on the second 

page. She read it. Sophie didn't understand all of what was said, but it sounded like the French government, under pressure from priests, had agreed to ban an American movie called The Last Temptation of Christ, which was about Jesus having sex with a lady called Mary Magdalene. Her grandfather's article said the Church was arrogant and wrong to ban it.
No wonder the priest is mad, Sophie thought.
"It's pornography! Sacrilege!" the priest yelled, emerging from the study and storming to the front door. "How can you possibly endorse that! This American Martin Scorsese is a blasphemer, and the Church will permit him no pulpit in France!" The priest slammed the door on his way out.
When her grandfather came into the kitchen, he saw Sophie with the paper and frowned. "You're quick."
Sophie said, "You think Jesus Christ had a girlfriend?"
"No, dear, I said the Church should not be allowed to tell us what notions we can and can't entertain."
"Did Jesus have a girlfriend?"
Her grandfather was silent for several moments. "Would it be so bad if He did?"
Sophie considered it and then shrugged. "I wouldn't mind." 
Sir Leigh Teabing was still talking. "I shan't bore you with the countless references to Jesus and Magdalene's union. That has been explored ad nauseum by modern historians. I would, however, like to point out the following." He motioned to another passage. "This is from the Gospel of Mary Magdalene."
Sophie had not known a gospel existed in Magdalene's words. She read the text:
And Peter said, "Did the Saviour really speak with a woman without our knowledge? Are we to turn about and all listen to her? Did he prefer her to us?"
And Levi answered, "Peter, you have always been hot-tempered. Now I see you contending against the woman like an adversary. If the Saviour made her worthy, who are you indeed to reject her? Surely the Saviour knows her very well. That is why he loved her more than us."
"The woman they are speaking of," Teabing explained, "is Mary Magdalene. Peter is jealous of 

her."
"Because Jesus preferred Mary?"
"Not only that. The stakes were far greater than mere affection. At this point in the gospels, Jesus suspects He will soon be captured and crucified. So He gives Mary Magdalene instructions on how to carry on His Church after He is gone. As a result, Peter expresses his discontent over playing second fiddle to a woman. I daresay Peter was something of a sexist."
Sophie was trying to keep up. "This is Saint Peter. The rock on which Jesus built His Church."
"The same, except for one catch. According to these unaltered gospels, it was not Peter to whom Christ gave directions with which to establish the Christian Church. It was Mary Magdalene."
Sophie looked at him. "You're saying the Christian Church was to be carried on by a woman?"
"That was the plan. Jesus was the original feminist. He intended for the future of His Church to be in the hands of Mary Magdalene."
"And Peter had a problem with that," Langdon said, pointing to The Last Supper. "That's Peter there. You can see that Da Vinci was well aware of how Peter felt about Mary Magdalene."
Again, Sophie was speechless. In the painting, Peter was leaning menacingly toward Mary Magdalene and slicing his blade-like hand across her neck. The same threatening gesture as in Madonna of the Rocks!
"And here too," Langdon said, pointing now to the crowd of disciples near Peter. "A bit ominous, no?"
Sophie squinted and saw a hand emerging from the crowd of disciples. "Is that hand wielding a dagger?"
"Yes. Stranger still, if you count the arms, you'll see that this hand belongs to... no one at all. It's disembodied. Anonymous."
Sophie was starting to feel overwhelmed. "I'm sorry, I still don't understand how all of this makes Mary Magdalene the Holy Grail."
"Aha!" Teabing exclaimed again. "Therein lies the rub!" He turned once more to the table and pulled out a large chart, spreading it out for her. It was an elaborate genealogy. "Few people realize that Mary Magdalene, in addition to being Christ's right hand, was a powerful woman already."
Sophie could now see the title of the family tree.

THE TRIBE OF BENJAMIN 
"Mary Magdalene is here," Teabing said, pointing near the top of the genealogy.
Sophie was surprised. "She was of the House of Benjamin?"
"Indeed," Teabing said. "Mary Magdalene was of royal descent."
"But I was under the impression Magdalene was poor."
Teabing shook his head. "Magdalene was recast as a whore in order to erase evidence of her powerful family ties."
Sophie found herself again glancing at Langdon, who again nodded. She turned back to Teabing. "But why would the early Church care if Magdalene had royal blood?"
The Briton smiled. "My dear child, it was not Mary Magdalene's royal blood that concerned the Church so much as it was her consorting with Christ, who also had royal blood. As you know, the Book of Matthew tells us that Jesus was of the House of David. A descendant of King Solomon—King of the Jews. By marrying into the powerful House of Benjamin, Jesus fused two royal bloodlines, creating a potent political union with the potential of making a legitimate claim to the throne and restoring the line of kings as it was under Solomon."
Sophie sensed he was at last coming to his point.
Teabing looked excited now. "The legend of the Holy Grail is a legend about royal blood. When Grail legend speaks of 'the chalice that held the blood of Christ'... it speaks, in fact, of Mary Magdalene—the female womb that carried Jesus' royal bloodline."
The words seemed to echo across the ballroom and back before they fully registered in Sophie's mind. Mary Magdalene carried the royal bloodline of Jesus Christ? "But how could Christ have a bloodline unless...?" She paused and looked at Langdon.
Langdon smiled softly. "Unless they had a child."
Sophie stood transfixed.
"Behold," Teabing proclaimed, "the greatest cover-up in human history. Not only was Jesus Christ married, but He was a father. My dear, Mary Magdalene was the Holy Vessel. She was the chalice that bore the royal bloodline of Jesus Christ. She was the womb that bore the lineage, and the vine from which the sacred fruit sprang forth!"

Sophie felt the hairs stand up on her arms. "But how could a secret that big be kept quiet all of these years?"
"Heavens!" Teabing said. "It has been anything but quiet! The royal bloodline of Jesus Christ is the source of the most enduring legend of all time—the Holy Grail. Magdalene's story has been shouted from the rooftops for centuries in all kinds of metaphors and languages. Her story is everywhere once you open your eyes."
"And the Sangreal documents?" Sophie said. "They allegedly contain proof that Jesus had a royal bloodline?"
"They do."
"So the entire Holy Grail legend is all about royal blood?"
"Quite literally," Teabing said. "The word Sangreal derives from San Greal—or Holy Grail. But in its most ancient form, the word Sangreal was divided in a different spot." Teabing wrote on a piece of scrap paper and handed it to her.
She read what he had written.
Sang Real 
Instantly, Sophie recognized the translation. Sang Real literally meant Royal Blood. 
CHAPTER 59
The male receptionist in the lobby of the Opus Dei headquarters on Lexington Avenue in New York City was surprised to hear Bishop Aringarosa's voice on the line. "Good evening, sir."
"Have I had any messages?" the bishop demanded, sounding unusually anxious.
"Yes, sir. I'm very glad you called in. I couldn't reach you in your apartment. You had an urgent phone message about half an hour ago."
"Yes?" He sounded relieved by the news. "Did the caller leave a name?"
"No, sir, just a number." The operator relayed the number.

"Prefix thirty-three? That's France, am I right?"
"Yes, sir. Paris. The caller said it was critical you contact him immediately."
"Thank you. I have been waiting for that call." Aringarosa quickly severed the connection.
As the receptionist hung up the receiver, he wondered why Aringarosa's phone connection sounded so crackly. The bishop's daily schedule showed him in New York this weekend, and yet he sounded a world away. The receptionist shrugged it off. Bishop Aringarosa had been acting very strangely the last few months. 
My cellular phone must not have been receiving, Aringarosa thought as the Fiat approached the exit for Rome's Ciampino Charter Airport. The Teacher was trying to reach me. Despite Aringarosa's concern at having missed the call, he felt encouraged that the Teacher felt confident enough to call Opus Dei headquarters directly.
Things must have gone well in Paris tonight.
As Aringarosa began dialing the number, he felt excited to know he would soon be in Paris. I'll be on the ground before dawn. Aringarosa had a chartered turbo prop awaiting him here for the short flight to France. Commercial carriers were not an option at this hour, especially considering the contents of his briefcase.
The line began to ring.
A female voice answered. "Direction Centrale Police Judidaire."
Aringarosa felt himself hesitate. This was unexpected. "Ah, yes... I was asked to call this number?"
"Qui êtes-vous?" the woman said. "Your name?"
Aringarosa was uncertain if he should reveal it. The French Judicial Police?
"Your name, monsieur?" the woman pressed.
"Bishop Manuel Aringarosa."
"Un moment." There was a click on the line.
After a long wait, another man came on, his tone gruff and concerned. "Bishop, I am glad I finally reached you. You and I have much to discuss."

CHAPTER 60
Sangreal... Sang Real... San Greal... Royal Blood... Holy Grail.
It was all intertwined.
The Holy Grail is Mary Magdalene... the mother of the royal bloodline of Jesus Christ. Sophie felt a new wave of disorientation as she stood in the silence of the ballroom and stared at Robert Langdon. The more pieces Langdon and Teabing laid on the table tonight, the more unpredictable this puzzle became.
"As you can see, my dear," Teabing said, hobbling toward a bookshelf, "Leonardo is not the only one who has been trying to tell the world the truth about the Holy Grail. The royal bloodline of Jesus Christ has been chronicled in exhaustive detail by scores of historians." He ran a finger down a row of several dozen books.
Sophie tilted her head and scanned the list of titles:
THE TEMPLAR REVELATION:
Secret Guardians of the True Identity of Christ 
THE WOMAN WITH THE ALABASTER JAR:
Mary Magdalene and the Holy Grail 
THE GODDESS IN THE GOSPELS
Reclaiming the Sacred Feminine 
"Here is perhaps the best-known tome," Teabing said, pulling a tattered hardcover from the stack and handing it to her. The cover read:
HOLY BLOOD, HOLY GRAIL
The Acclaimed International Bestseller 
Sophie glanced up. "An international bestseller? I've never heard of it."
"You were young. This caused quite a stir back in the nineteen eighties. To my taste, the authors made some dubious leaps of faith in their analysis, but their fundamental premise is sound, and to their credit, they finally brought the idea of Christ's bloodline into the mainstream."

"What was the Church's reaction to the book?"
"Outrage, of course. But that was to be expected. After all, this was a secret the Vatican had tried to bury in the fourth century. That's part of what the Crusades were about. Gathering and destroying information. The threat Mary Magdalene posed to the men of the early Church was potentially ruinous. Not only was she the woman to whom Jesus had assigned the task of founding the Church, but she also had physical proof that the Church's newly proclaimed deity had spawned a mortal bloodline. The Church, in order to defend itself against the Magdalene's power, perpetuated her image as a whore and buried evidence of Christ's marriage to her, thereby defusing any potential claims that Christ had a surviving bloodline and was a mortal prophet."
Sophie glanced at Langdon, who nodded. "Sophie, the historical evidence supporting this is substantial."
"I admit," Teabing said, "the assertions are dire, but you must understand the Church's powerful motivations to conduct such a cover-up. They could never have survived public knowledge of a bloodline. A child of Jesus would undermine the critical notion of Christ's divinity and therefore the Christian Church, which declared itself the sole vessel through which humanity could access the divine and gain entrance to the kingdom of heaven."
"The five-petal rose," Sophie said, pointing suddenly to the spine of one of Teabing's books. The same exact design inlaid on the rosewood box.
Teabing glanced at Langdon and grinned. "She has a good eye." He turned back to Sophie. "That is the Priory symbol for the Grail. Mary Magdalene. Because her name was forbidden by the Church, Mary Magdalene became secretly known by many pseudonyms—the Chalice, the Holy Grail, and the Rose." He paused. "The Rose has ties to the five-pointed pentacle of Venus and the guiding Compass Rose. By the way, the word rose is identical in English, French, German, and many other languages."
"Rose," Langdon added, "is also an anagram of Eros, the Greek god of sexual love."
Sophie gave him a surprised look as Teabing plowed on.
"The Rose has always been the premiere symbol of female sexuality. In primitive goddess cults, the five petals represented the five stations of female life—birth, menstruation, motherhood, menopause, and death. And in modern times, the flowering rose's ties to womanhood are considered more visual." He glanced at Robert. "Perhaps the symbologist could explain?"
Robert hesitated. A moment too long.
"Oh, heavens!" Teabing huffed. "You Americans are such prudes." He looked back at Sophie. 

"What Robert is fumbling with is the fact that the blossoming flower resembles the female genitalia, the sublime blossom from which all mankind enters the world. And if you've ever seen any paintings by Georgia O'Keeffe, you'll know exactly what I mean."
"The point here," Langdon said, motioning back to the bookshelf, "is that all of these books substantiate the same historical claim."
"That Jesus was a father." Sophie was still uncertain.
"Yes," Teabing said. "And that Mary Magdalene was the womb that carried His royal lineage. The Priory of Sion, to this day, still worships Mary Magdalene as the Goddess, the Holy Grail, the Rose, and the Divine Mother."
Sophie again flashed on the ritual in the basement.
"According to the Priory," Teabing continued, "Mary Magdalene was pregnant at the time of the crucifixion. For the safety of Christ's unborn child, she had no choice but to flee the Holy Land. With the help of Jesus' trusted uncle, Joseph of Arimathea, Mary Magdalene secretly traveled to France, then known as Gaul. There she found safe refuge in the Jewish community. It was here in France that she gave birth to a daughter. Her name was Sarah."
Sophie glanced up. "They actually know the child's name?"
"Far more than that. Magdalene's and Sarah's lives were scrutinously chronicled by their Jewish protectors. Remember that Magdalene's child belonged to the lineage of Jewish kings—David and Solomon. For this reason, the Jews in France considered Magdalene sacred royalty and revered her as the progenitor of the royal line of kings. Countless scholars of that era chronicled Mary Magdalene's days in France, including the birth of Sarah and the subsequent family tree."
Sophie was startled. "There exists a family tree of Jesus Christ?"
"Indeed. And it is purportedly one of the cornerstones of the Sangreal documents. A complete genealogy of the early descendants of Christ."
"But what good is a documented genealogy of Christ's bloodline?" Sophie asked. "It's not proof. Historians could not possibly confirm its authenticity."
Teabing chuckled. "No more so than they can confirm the authenticity of the Bible."
"Meaning?"
"Meaning that history is always written by the winners. When two cultures clash, the loser is obliterated, and the winner writes the history books—books which glorify their own cause and 

disparage the conquered foe. As Napoleon once said, 'What is history, but a fable agreed upon?' " He smiled. "By its very nature, history is always a one-sided account."
Sophie had never thought of it that way.
"The Sangreal documents simply tell the other side of the Christ story. In the end, which side of the story you believe becomes a matter of faith and personal exploration, but at least the information has survived. The Sangreal documents include tens of thousands of pages of information. Eyewitness accounts of the Sangreal treasure describe it as being carried in four enormous trunks. In those trunks are reputed to be the Purist Documents—thousands of pages of unaltered, pre-Constantine documents, written by the early followers of Jesus, revering Him as a wholly human teacher and prophet. Also rumored to be part of the treasure is the legendary "Q" Document—a manuscript that even the Vatican admits they believe exists. Allegedly, it is a book of Jesus' teachings, possibly written in His own hand."
"Writings by Christ Himself?"
"Of course," Teabing said. "Why wouldn't Jesus have kept a chronicle of His ministry? Most people did in those days. Another explosive document believed to be in the treasure is a manuscript called The Magdalene Diaries—Mary Magdalene's personal account of her relationship with Christ, His crucifixion, and her time in France."
Sophie was silent for a long moment. "And these four chests of documents were the treasure that the Knights Templar found under Solomon's Temple?"
"Exactly. The documents that made the Knights so powerful. The documents that have been the object of countless Grail quests throughout history."
"But you said the Holy Grail was Mary Magdalene. If people are searching for documents, why would you call it a search for the Holy Grail?"
Teabing eyed her, his expression softening. "Because the hiding place of the Holy Grail includes a sarcophagus."
Outside, the wind howled in the trees.
Teabing spoke more quietly now. "The quest for the Holy Grail is literally the quest to kneel before the bones of Mary Magdalene. A journey to pray at the feet of the outcast one, the lost sacred feminine."
Sophie felt an unexpected wonder. "The hiding place of the Holy Grail is actually... a tomb?"
Teabing's hazel eyes got misty. "It is. A tomb containing the body of Mary Magdalene and the 

documents that tell the true story of her life. At its heart, the quest for the Holy Grail has always been a quest for the Magdalene—the wronged Queen, entombed with proof of her family's rightful claim to power."
Sophie waited a moment as Teabing gathered himself. So much about her grandfather was still not making sense. "Members of the Priory," she finally said, "all these years have answered the charge of protecting the Sangreal documents and the tomb of Mary Magdalene?"
"Yes, but the brotherhood had another, more important duty as well—to protect the bloodline itself. Christ's lineage was in perpetual danger. The early Church feared that if the lineage were permitted to grow, the secret of Jesus and Magdalene would eventually surface and challenge the fundamental Catholic doctrine—that of a divine Messiah who did not consort with women or engage in sexual union." He paused. "Nonetheless, Christ's line grew quietly under cover in France until making a bold move in the fifth century, when it intermarried with French royal blood and created a lineage known as the Merovingian bloodline."
This news surprised Sophie. Merovingian was a term learned by every student in France. "The Merovingians founded Paris."
"Yes. That's one of the reasons the Grail legend is so rich in France. Many of the Vatican's Grail quests here were in fact stealth missions to erase members of the royal bloodline. Have you heard of King Dagobert?"
Sophie vaguely recalled the name from a grisly tale in history class. "Dagobert was a Merovingian king, wasn't he? Stabbed in the eye while sleeping?"
"Exactly. Assassinated by the Vatican in collusion with Pepin d'Heristal. Late seventh century. With Dagobert's murder, the Merovingian bloodline was almost exterminated. Fortunately, Dagobert's son, Sigisbert, secretly escaped the attack and carried on the lineage, which later included Godefroi de Bouillon—founder of the Priory of Sion."
"The same man," Langdon said, "who ordered the Knights Templar to recover the Sangreal documents from beneath Solomon's Temple and thus provide the Merovingians proof of their hereditary ties to Jesus Christ."
Teabing nodded, heaving a ponderous sigh. "The modern Priory of Sion has a momentous duty. Theirs is a threefold charge. The brotherhood must protect the Sangreal documents. They must protect the tomb of Mary Magdalene. And, of course, they must nurture and protect the bloodline of Christ—those few members of the royal Merovingian bloodline who have survived into modern times."
The words hung in the huge space, and Sophie felt an odd vibration, as if her bones were reverberating with some new kind of truth. Descendants of Jesus who survived into modern times.

Her grandfather's voice again was whispering in her ear. Princess, I must tell you the truth about your family.
A chill raked her flesh.
Royal blood.
She could not imagine.
Princess Sophie.
"Sir Leigh?" The manservant's words crackled through the intercom on the wall, and Sophie jumped. "If you could join me in the kitchen a moment?"
Teabing scowled at the ill-timed intrusion. He went over to the intercom and pressed the button. "Rémy, as you know, I am busy with my guests. If we need anything else from the kitchen tonight, we will help ourselves. Thank you and good night."
"A word with you before I retire, sir. If you would."
Teabing grunted and pressed the button. "Make it quick, Rémy."
"It is a household matter, sir, hardly fare for guests to endure."
Teabing looked incredulous. "And it cannot wait until morning?"
"No, sir. My question won't take a minute."
Teabing rolled his eyes and looked at Langdon and Sophie. "Sometimes I wonder who is serving whom?" He pressed the button again. "I'll be right there, Rémy. Can I bring you anything when I come?"
"Only freedom from oppression, sir."
"Rémy, you realize your steak au poivre is the only reason you still work for me."
"So you tell me, sir. So you tell me." 
CHAPTER 61
Princess Sophie.

Sophie felt hollow as she listened to the clicking of Teabing's crutches fade down the hallway. Numb, she turned and faced Langdon in the deserted ballroom. He was already shaking his head as if reading her mind.
"No, Sophie," he whispered, his eyes reassuring. "The same thought crossed my mind when I realized your grandfather was in the Priory, and you said he wanted to tell you a secret about your family. But it's impossible." Langdon paused. "Saunière is not a Merovingian name."
Sophie wasn't sure whether to feel relieved or disappointed. Earlier, Langdon had asked an unusual passing question about Sophie's mother's maiden name. Chauvel. The question now made sense. "And Chauvel?" she asked, anxious.
Again he shook his head. "I'm sorry. I know that would have answered some questions for you. Only two direct lines of Merovingians remain. Their family names are Plantard and Saint-Clair. Both families live in hiding, probably protected by the Priory."
Sophie repeated the names silently in her mind and then shook her head. There was no one in her family named Plantard or Saint-Clair. A weary undertow was pulling at her now. She realized she was no closer than she had been at the Louvre to understanding what truth her grandfather had wanted to reveal to her. Sophie wished her grandfather had never mentioned her family this afternoon. He had torn open old wounds that felt as painful now as ever. They are dead, Sophie. They are not coming back. She thought of her mother singing her to sleep at night, of her father giving her rides on his shoulders, and of her grandmother and younger brother smiling at her with their fervent green eyes. All that was stolen. And all she had left was her grandfather.
And now he is gone too. I am alone.
Sophie turned quietly back to The Last Supper and gazed at Mary Magdalene's long red hair and quiet eyes. There was something in the woman's expression that echoed the loss of a loved one. Sophie could feel it too.
"Robert?" she said softly.
He stepped closer.
"I know Leigh said the Grail story is all around us, but tonight is the first time I've ever heard any of this."
Langdon looked as if he wanted to put a comforting hand on her shoulder, but he refrained. "You've heard her story before, Sophie. Everyone has. We just don't realize it when we hear it."
"I don't understand."

"The Grail story is everywhere, but it is hidden. When the Church outlawed speaking of the shunned Mary Magdalene, her story and importance had to be passed on through more discreet channels... channels that supported metaphor and symbolism."
"Of course. The arts."
Langdon motioned to The Last Supper. "A perfect example. Some of today's most enduring art, literature, and music secretly tell the history of Mary Magdalene and Jesus."
Langdon quickly told her about works by Da Vinci, Botticelli, Poussin, Bernini, Mozart, and Victor Hugo that all whispered of the quest to restore the banished sacred feminine. Enduring legends like Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, King Arthur, and Sleeping Beauty were Grail allegories. Victor Hugo's Hunchback of Notre Dame and Mozart's Magic Flute were filled with Masonic symbolism and Grail secrets.
"Once you open your eyes to the Holy Grail," Langdon said, "you see her everywhere. Paintings. Music. Books. Even in cartoons, theme parks, and popular movies."
Langdon held up his Mickey Mouse watch and told her that Walt Disney had made it his quiet life's work to pass on the Grail story to future generations. Throughout his entire life, Disney had been hailed as "the Modern-Day Leonardo da Vinci." Both men were generations ahead of their times, uniquely gifted artists, members of secret societies, and, most notably, avid pranksters. Like Leonardo, Walt Disney loved infusing hidden messages and symbolism in his art. For the trained symbologist, watching an early Disney movie was like being barraged by an avalanche of allusion and metaphor.
Most of Disney's hidden messages dealt with religion, pagan myth, and stories of the subjugated goddess. It was no mistake that Disney retold tales like Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty, and Snow White—all of which dealt with the incarceration of the sacred feminine. Nor did one need a background in symbolism to understand that Snow White—a princess who fell from grace after partaking of a poisoned apple—was a clear allusion to the downfall of Eve in the Garden of Eden. Or that Sleeping Beauty's Princess Aurora—code-named "Rose" and hidden deep in the forest to protect her from the clutches of the evil witch—was the Grail story for children.
Despite its corporate image, Disney still had a savvy, playful element among its employees, and their artists still amused themselves by inserting hidden symbolism in Disney products. Langdon would never forget one of his students bringing in a DVD of The Lion King and pausing the film to reveal a freeze-frame in which the word SEX was clearly visible, spelled out by floating dust particles over Simba's head. Although Langdon suspected this was more of a cartoonist's sophomoric prank than any kind of enlightened allusion to pagan human sexuality, he had learned not to underestimate Disney's grasp of symbolism. The Little Mermaid was a spellbinding tapestry of spiritual symbols so specifically goddess-related that they could not be coincidence.

When Langdon had first seen The Little Mermaid, he had actually gasped aloud when he noticed that the painting in Ariel's underwater home was none other than seventeenth-century artist Georges de la Tour's The Penitent Magdalene—a famous homage to the banished Mary Magdalene—fitting decor considering the movie turned out to be a ninety-minute collage of blatant symbolic references to the lost sanctity of Isis, Eve, Pisces the fish goddess, and, repeatedly, Mary Magdalene. The Little Mermaid's name, Ariel, possessed powerful ties to the sacred feminine and, in the Book of Isaiah, was synonymous with "the Holy City besieged." Of course, the Little Mermaid's flowing red hair was certainly no coincidence either.
The clicking of Teabing's crutches approached in the hallway, his pace unusually brisk. When their host entered the study, his expression was stern.
"You'd better explain yourself, Robert," he said coldly. "You have not been honest with me." 
CHAPTER 62
"I'm being framed, Leigh," Langdon said, trying to stay calm. You know me. I wouldn't kill anyone.
Teabing's tone did not soften. "Robert, you're on television, for Christ's sake. Did you know you were wanted by the authorities?"
"Yes."
"Then you abused my trust. I'm astonished you would put me at risk by coming here and asking me to ramble on about the Grail so you could hide out in my home."
"I didn't kill anyone."
"Jacques Saunière is dead, and the police say you did it." Teabing looked saddened. "Such a contributor to the arts..."
"Sir?" The manservant had appeared now, standing behind Teabing in the study doorway, his arms crossed. "Shall I show them out?"
"Allow me." Teabing hobbled across the study, unlocked a set of wide glass doors, and swung them open onto a side lawn. "Please find your car, and leave."
Sophie did not move. "We have information about the clef de voûte. The Priory keystone."
Teabing stared at her for several seconds and scoffed derisively. "A desperate ploy. Robert knows 

how I've sought it."
"She's telling the truth," Langdon said. "That's why we came to you tonight. To talk to you about the keystone."
The manservant intervened now. "Leave, or I shall call the authorities."
"Leigh," Langdon whispered, "we know where it is."
Teabing's balance seemed to falter a bit.
Rémy now marched stiffly across the room. "Leave at once! Or I will forcibly—"
"Rémy!" Teabing spun, snapping at his servant. "Excuse us for a moment."
The servant's jaw dropped. "Sir? I must protest. These people are—"
"I'll handle this." Teabing pointed to the hallway.
After a moment of stunned silence, Rémy skulked out like a banished dog.
In the cool night breeze coming through the open doors, Teabing turned back to Sophie and Langdon, his expression still wary. "This better be good. What do you know of the keystone?" 
In the thick brush outside Teabing's study, Silas clutched his pistol and gazed through the glass doors. Only moments ago, he had circled the house and seen Langdon and the woman talking in the large study. Before he could move in, a man on crutches entered, yelled at Langdon, threw open the doors, and demanded his guests leave. Then the woman mentioned the keystone, and everything changed. Shouts turned to whispers. Moods softened. And the glass doors were quickly closed.
Now, as he huddled in the shadows, Silas peered through the glass. The keystone is somewhere inside the house. Silas could feel it.
Staying in the shadows, he inched closer to the glass, eager to hear what was being said. He would give them five minutes. If they did not reveal where they had placed the keystone, Silas would have to enter and persuade them with force. 
Inside the study, Langdon could sense their host's bewilderment.

"Grand Master?" Teabing choked, eyeing Sophie. "Jacques Saunière?"
Sophie nodded, seeing the shock in his eyes.
"But you could not possibly know that!"
"Jacques Saunière was my grandfather."
Teabing staggered back on his crutches, shooting a glance at Langdon, who nodded. Teabing turned back to Sophie. "Miss Neveu, I am speechless. If this is true, then I am truly sorry for your loss. I should admit, for my research, I have kept lists of men in Paris whom I thought might be good candidates for involvement in the Priory. Jacques Saunière was on that list along with many others. But Grand Master, you say? It's hard to fathom." Teabing was silent a moment and then shook his head. "But it still makes no sense. Even if your grandfather were the Priory Grand Master and created the keystone himself, he would never tell you how to find it. The keystone reveals the pathway to the brotherhood's ultimate treasure. Granddaughter or not, you are not eligible to receive such knowledge."
"Mr. Saunière was dying when he passed on the information," Langdon said. "He had limited options."
"He didn't need options," Teabing argued. "There exist three sénéchaux who also know the secret. That is the beauty of their system. One will rise to Grand Master and they will induct a new sénéchal and share the secret of the keystone."
"I guess you didn't see the entire news broadcast," Sophie said. "In addition to my grandfather, three other prominent Parisians were murdered today. All in similar ways. All looked like they had been interrogated."
Teabing's jaw fell. "And you think they were..."
"The sénéchaux," Langdon said.
"But how? A murderer could not possibly learn the identities of all four top members of the Priory of Sion! Look at me, I have been researching them for decades, and I can't even name one Priory member. It seems inconceivable that all three sénéchaux and the Grand Master could be discovered and killed in one day."
"I doubt the information was gathered in a single day," Sophie said. "It sounds like a well-planned décapiter. It's a technique we use to fight organized crime syndicates. If DCPJ wants to move on a certain group, they will silently listen and watch for months, identify all the main players, and then move in and take them all at the same moment. Decapitation. With no leadership, the group falls into chaos and divulges other information. It's possible someone patiently watched the Priory and 

then attacked, hoping the top people would reveal the location of the keystone."
Teabing looked unconvinced. "But the brothers would never talk. They are sworn to secrecy. Even in the face of death."
"Exactly," Langdon said. "Meaning, if they never divulged the secret, and they were killed..."
Teabing gasped. "Then the location of the keystone would be lost forever!"
"And with it," Langdon said, "the location of the Holy Grail."
Teabing's body seemed to sway with the weight of Langdon's words. Then, as if too tired to stand another moment, he flopped in a chair and stared out the window.
Sophie walked over, her voice soft. "Considering my grandfather's predicament, it seems possible that in total desperation he tried to pass the secret on to someone outside the brotherhood. Someone he thought he could trust. Someone in his family."
Teabing was pale. "But someone capable of such an attack... of discovering so much about the brotherhood..." He paused, radiating a new fear. "It could only be one force. This kind of infiltration could only have come from the Priory's oldest enemy."
Langdon glanced up. "The Church."
"Who else? Rome has been seeking the Grail for centuries."
Sophie was skeptical. "You think the Church killed my grandfather?"
Teabing replied, "It would not be the first time in history the Church has killed to protect itself. The documents that accompany the Holy Grail are explosive, and the Church has wanted to destroy them for years."
Langdon was having trouble buying Teabing's premise that the Church would blatantly murder people to obtain these documents. Having met the new Pope and many of the cardinals, Langdon knew they were deeply spiritual men who would never condone assassination. Regardless of the stakes.
Sophie seemed to be having similar thoughts. "Isn't it possible that these Priory members were murdered by someone outside the Church? Someone who didn't understand what the Grail really is? The Cup of Christ, after all, would be quite an enticing treasure. Certainly treasure hunters have killed for less."
"In my experience," Teabing said, "men go to far greater lengths to avoid what they fear than to 

obtain what they desire. I sense a desperation in this assault on the Priory."
"Leigh," Langdon said, "the argument is paradoxical. Why would members of the Catholic clergy murder Priory members in an effort to find and destroy documents they believe are false testimony anyway?"
Teabing chuckled. "The ivory towers of Harvard have made you soft, Robert. Yes, the clergy in Rome are blessed with potent faith, and because of this, their beliefs can weather any storm, including documents that contradict everything they hold dear. But what about the rest of the world? What about those who are not blessed with absolute certainty? What about those who look at the cruelty in the world and say, where is God today? Those who look at Church scandals and ask, who are these men who claim to speak the truth about Christ and yet lie to cover up the sexual abuse of children by their own priests?" Teabing paused. "What happens to those people, Robert, if persuasive scientific evidence comes out that the Church's version of the Christ story is inaccurate, and that the greatest story ever told is, in fact, the greatest story ever sold"
Langdon did not respond.
"I'll tell you what happens if the documents get out," Teabing said. "The Vatican faces a crisis of faith unprecedented in its two-millennia history."
After a long silence, Sophie said, "But if it is the Church who is responsible for this attack, why would they act now? After all these years? The Priory keeps the Sangreal documents hidden. They pose no immediate threat to the Church."
Teabing heaved an ominous sigh and glanced at Langdon. "Robert, I assume you are familiar with the Priory's final charge?"
Langdon felt his breath catch at the thought. "I am."
"Miss Neveu," Teabing said, "the Church and the Priory have had a tacit understanding for years. That is, the Church does not attack the Priory, and the Priory keeps the Sangreal documents hidden." He paused. "However, part of the Priory history has always included a plan to unveil the secret. With the arrival of a specific date in history, the brotherhood plans to break the silence and carry out its ultimate triumph by unveiling the Sangreal documents to the world and shouting the true story of Jesus Christ from the mountaintops."
Sophie stared at Teabing in silence. Finally, she too sat down. "And you think that date is approaching? And the Church knows it?"
"A speculation," Teabing said, "but it would certainly provide the Church motivation for an all-out attack to find the documents before it was too late."

Langdon had the uneasy feeling that Teabing was making good sense. "Do you think the Church would actually be capable of uncovering hard evidence of the Priory's date?"
"Why not—if we're assuming the Church was able to uncover the identities of the Priory members, then certainly they could have learned of their plans. And even if they don't have the exact date, their superstitions may be getting the best of them."
"Superstitions?" Sophie asked.
"In terms of prophecy," Teabing said, "we are currently in an epoch of enormous change. The millennium has recently passed, and with it has ended the two-thousand-year-long astrological Age of Pisces—the fish, which is also the sign of Jesus. As any astrological symbologist will tell you, the Piscean ideal believes that man must be told what to do by higher powers because man is incapable of thinking for himself. Hence it has been a time of fervent religion. Now, however, we are entering the Age of Aquarius—the water bearer—whose ideals claim that man will learn the truth and be able to think for himself. The ideological shift is enormous, and it is occurring right now."
Langdon felt a shiver. Astrological prophecy never held much interest or credibility for him, but he knew there were those in the Church who followed it very closely. "The Church calls this transitional period the End of Days."
Sophie looked skeptical. "As in the end of the world? The Apocalypse?"
"No." Langdon replied. "That's a common misconception. Many religions speak of the End of Days. It refers not to the end of the world, but rather the end of our current age—Pisces, which began at the time of Christ's birth, spanned two thousand years, and waned with the passing of the millennium. Now that we've passed into the Age of Aquarius, the End of Days has arrived."
"Many Grail historians," Teabing added, "believe that if the Priory is indeed planning to release this truth, this point in history would be a symbolically apt time. Most Priory academics, myself included, anticipated the brotherhood's release would coincide precisely with the millennium. Obviously, it did not. Admittedly, the Roman calendar does not mesh perfectly with astrological markers, so there is some gray area in the prediction. Whether the Church now has inside information that an exact date is looming, or whether they are just getting nervous on account of astrological prophecy, I don't know. Anyway, it's immaterial. Either scenario explains how the Church might be motivated to launch a preemptive attack against the Priory." Teabing frowned. "And believe me, if the Church finds the Holy Grail, they will destroy it. The documents and the relics of the blessed Mary Magdalene as well." His eyes grew heavy. "Then, my dear, with the Sangreal documents gone, all evidence will be lost. The Church will have won their age-old war to rewrite history. The past will be erased forever."
Slowly, Sophie pulled the cruciform key from her sweater pocket and held it out to Teabing.

Teabing took the key and studied it. "My goodness. The Priory seal. Where did you get this?"
"My grandfather gave it to me tonight before he died."
Teabing ran his fingers across the cruciform. "A key to a church?"
She drew a deep breath. "This key provides access to the keystone."
Teabing's head snapped up, his face wild with disbelief. "Impossible! What church did I miss? I've searched every church in France!"
"It's not in a church," Sophie said. "It's in a Swiss depository bank."
Teabing's look of excitement waned. "The keystone is in a bank?"
"A vault," Langdon offered.
"A bank vault?" Teabing shook his head violently. "That's impossible. The keystone is supposed to be hidden beneath the sign of the Rose."
"It is," Langdon said. "It was stored in a rosewood box inlaid with a five-petal Rose."
Teabing looked thunderstruck. "You've seen the keystone?"
Sophie nodded. "We visited the bank."
Teabing came over to them, his eyes wild with fear. "My friends, we must do something. The keystone is in danger! We have a duty to protect it. What if there are other keys? Perhaps stolen from the murdered sénéchaux? If the Church can gain access to the bank as you have—"
"Then they will be too late," Sophie said. "We removed the keystone."
"What! You removed the keystone from its hiding place?"
"Don't worry," Langdon said. "The keystone is well hidden."
"Extremely well hidden, I hope!"
"Actually," Langdon said, unable to hide his grin, "that depends on how often you dust under your couch."

The wind outside Château Villette had picked up, and Silas's robe danced in the breeze as he crouched near the window. Although he had been unable to hear much of the conversation, the word keystone had sifted through the glass on numerous occasions.
It is inside.
The Teacher's words were fresh in his mind. Enter Château Villette. Take the keystone. Hun no one.
Now, Langdon and the others had adjourned suddenly to another room, extinguishing the study lights as they went. Feeling like a panther stalking prey, Silas crept to the glass doors. Finding them unlocked, he slipped inside and closed the doors silently behind him. He could hear muffled voices from another room. Silas pulled the pistol from his pocket, turned off the safety, and inched down the hallway. 
CHAPTER 63
Lieutenant Collet stood alone at the foot of Leigh Teabing's driveway and gazed up at the massive house. Isolated. Dark. Good ground cover. Collet watched his half-dozen agents spreading silently out along the length of the fence. They could be over it and have the house surrounded in a matter of minutes. Langdon could not have chosen a more ideal spot for Collet's men to make a surprise assault.
Collet was about to call Fache himself when at last his phone rang.
Fache sounded not nearly as pleased with the developments as Collet would have imagined. "Why didn't someone tell me we had a lead on Langdon?"
"You were on a phone call and—"
"Where exactly are you, Lieutenant Collet?"
Collet gave him the address. "The estate belongs to a British national named Teabing. Langdon drove a fair distance to get here, and the vehicle is inside the security gate, with no signs of forced entry, so chances are good that Langdon knows the occupant."
"I'm coming out," Fache said. "Don't make a move. I'll handle this personally."
Collet's jaw dropped. "But Captain, you're twenty minutes away! We should act immediately. I have him staked out. I'm with eight men total. Four of us have field rifles and the others have 

sidearms."
"Wait for me."
"Captain, what if Langdon has a hostage in there? What if he sees us and decides to leave on foot? We need to move now! My men are in position and ready to go."
"Lieutenant Collet, you will wait for me to arrive before taking action. That is an order." Fache hung up.
Stunned, Lieutenant Collet switched off his phone. Why the hell is Fache asking me to wait? Collet knew the answer. Fache, though famous for his instinct, was notorious for his pride. Fache wants credit for the arrest. After putting the American's face all over the television, Fache wanted to be sure his own face got equal time. Collet's job was simply to hold down the fort until the boss showed up to save the day.
As he stood there, Collet flashed on a second possible explanation for this delay. Damage control. In law enforcement, hesitating to arrest a fugitive only occurred when uncertainty had arisen regarding the suspect's guilt. Is Fache having second thoughts that Langdon is the right man? The thought was frightening. Captain Fache had gone out on a limb tonight to arrest Robert Langdon—surveillance cachée, Interpol, and now television. Not even the great Bezu Fache would survive the political fallout if he had mistakenly splashed a prominent American's face all over French television, claiming he was a murderer. If Fache now realized he'd made a mistake, then it made perfect sense that he would tell Collet not to make a move. The last thing Fache needed was for Collet to storm an innocent Brit's private estate and take Langdon at gunpoint.
Moreover, Collet realized, if Langdon were innocent, it explained one of this case's strangest paradoxes: Why had Sophie Neveu, the granddaughter of the victim, helped the alleged killer escape? Unless Sophie knew Langdon was falsely charged. Fache had posited all kinds of explanations tonight to explain Sophie's odd behavior, including that Sophie, as Saunière's sole heir, had persuaded her secret lover Robert Langdon to kill off Saunière for the inheritance money. Saunière, if he had suspected this, might have left the police the message P.S. Find Robert Langdon. Collet was fairly certain something else was going on here. Sophie Neveu seemed far too solid of character to be mixed up in something that sordid.
"Lieutenant?" One of the field agents came running over. "We found a car."
Collet followed the agent about fifty yards past the driveway. The agent pointed to a wide shoulder on the opposite side of the road. There, parked in the brush, almost out of sight, was a black Audi. It had rental plates. Collet felt the hood. Still warm. Hot even.
"That must be how Langdon got here," Collet said. "Call the rental company. Find out if it's stolen."

"Yes, sir."
Another agent waved Collet back over in the direction of the fence. "Lieutenant, have a look at this." He handed Collet a pair of night vision binoculars. "The grove of trees near the top of the driveway."
Collet aimed the binoculars up the hill and adjusted the image intensifier dials. Slowly, the greenish shapes came into focus. He located the curve of the driveway and slowly followed it up, reaching the grove of trees. All he could do was stare. There, shrouded in the greenery, was an armored truck. A truck identical to the one Collet had permitted to leave the Depository Bank of Zurich earlier tonight. He prayed this was some kind of bizarre coincidence, but he knew it could not be.
"It seems obvious," the agent said, "that this truck is how Langdon and Neveu got away from the bank."
Collet was speechless. He thought of the armored truck driver he had stopped at the roadblock. The Rolex. His impatience to leave. I never checked the cargo hold.
Incredulous, Collet realized that someone in the bank had actually lied to DCPJ about Langdon and Sophie's whereabouts and then helped them escape. But who? And why? Collet wondered if maybe this were the reason Fache had told him not to take action yet. Maybe Fache realized there were more people involved tonight than just Langdon and Sophie. And if Langdon and Neveu arrived in the armored truck, then who drove the Audi? 
Hundreds of miles to the south, a chartered Beechcraft Baron 58 raced northward over the Tyrrhenian Sea. Despite calm skies, Bishop Aringarosa clutched an airsickness bag, certain he could be ill at any moment. His conversation with Paris had not at all been what he had imagined.
Alone in the small cabin, Aringarosa twisted the gold ring on his finger and tried to ease his overwhelming sense of fear and desperation. Everything in Paris has gone terribly wrong. Closing his eyes, Aringarosa said a prayer that Bezu Fache would have the means to fix it. 
CHAPTER 64
Teabing sat on the divan, cradling the wooden box on his lap and admiring the lid's intricate inlaid Rose. Tonight has become the strangest and most magical night of my life.

"Lift the lid," Sophie whispered, standing over him, beside Langdon.
Teabing smiled. Do not rush me. Having spent over a decade searching for this keystone, he wanted to savor every millisecond of this moment. He ran a palm across the wooden lid, feeling the texture of the inlaid flower.
"The Rose," he whispered. The Rose is Magdalene is the Holy Grail. The Rose is the compass that guides the way. Teabing felt foolish. For years he had traveled to cathedrals and churches all over France, paying for special access, examining hundreds of archways beneath rose windows, searching for an encrypted keystone. La clef de voûte—a stone key beneath the sign of the Rose.
Teabing slowly unlatched the lid and raised it.
As his eyes finally gazed upon the contents, he knew in an instant it could only be the keystone. He was staring at a stone cylinder, crafted of interconnecting lettered dials. The device seemed surprisingly familiar to him.
"Designed from Da Vinci's diaries," Sophie said. "My grandfather made them as a hobby."
Of course, Teabing realized. He had seen the sketches and blueprints. The key to finding the Holy Grail lies inside this stone. Teabing lifted the heavy cryptex from the box, holding it gently. Although he had no idea how to open the cylinder, he sensed his own destiny lay inside. In moments of failure, Teabing had questioned whether his life's quest would ever be rewarded. Now those doubts were gone forever. He could hear the ancient words... the foundation of the Grail legend:
Vous ne trouvez pas le Saint-Graal, c'est le Saint-Graal qui vous trouve.
You do not find the Grail, the Grail finds you.
And tonight, incredibly, the key to finding the Holy Grail had walked right through his front door. 
While Sophie and Teabing sat with the cryptex and talked about the vinegar, the dials, and what the password might be, Langdon carried the rosewood box across the room to a well-lit table to get a better look at it. Something Teabing had just said was now running through Langdon's mind.
The key to the Grail is hidden beneath the sign of the Rose.
Langdon held the wooden box up to the light and examined the inlaid symbol of the Rose. Although his familiarity with art did not include woodworking or inlaid furniture, he had just recalled the famous tiled ceiling of the Spanish monastery outside of Madrid, where, three 

centuries after its construction, the ceiling tiles began to fall out, revealing sacred texts scrawled by monks on the plaster beneath.
Langdon looked again at the Rose.
Beneath the Rose.
Sub Rosa.
Secret.
A bump in the hallway behind him made Langdon turn. He saw nothing but shadows. Teabing's manservant most likely had passed through. Langdon turned back to the box. He ran his finger over the smooth edge of the inlay, wondering if he could pry the Rose out, but the craftsmanship was perfect. He doubted even a razor blade could fit in between the inlaid Rose and the carefully carved depression into which it was seated.
Opening the box, he examined the inside of the lid. It was smooth. As he shifted its position, though, the light caught what appeared to be a small hole on the underside of the lid, positioned in the exact center. Langdon closed the lid and examined the inlaid symbol from the top. No hole.
It doesn't pass through.
Setting the box on the table, he looked around the room and spied a stack of papers with a paper clip on it. Borrowing the clip, he returned to the box, opened it, and studied the hole again. Carefully, he unbent the paper clip and inserted one end into the hole. He gave a gentle push. It took almost no effort. He heard something clatter quietly onto the table. Langdon closed the lid to look. It was a small piece of wood, like a puzzle piece. The wooden Rose had popped out of the lid and fallen onto the desk.
Speechless, Langdon stared at the bare spot on the lid where the Rose had been. There, engraved in the wood, written in an immaculate hand, were four lines of text in a language he had never seen.
The characters look vaguely Semitic, Langdon thought to himself, and yet I don't recognize the language!
A sudden movement behind him caught his attention. Out of nowhere, a crushing blow to the head knocked Langdon to his knees.
As he fell, he thought for a moment he saw a pale ghost hovering over him, clutching a gun. Then everything went black.

CHAPTER 65
Sophie Neveu, despite working in law enforcement, had never found herself at gunpoint until tonight. Almost inconceivably, the gun into which she was now staring was clutched in the pale hand of an enormous albino with long white hair. He looked at her with red eyes that radiated a frightening, disembodied quality. Dressed in a wool robe with a rope tie, he resembled a medieval cleric. Sophie could not imagine who he was, and yet she was feeling a sudden newfound respect for Teabing's suspicions that the Church was behind this.
"You know what I have come for," the monk said, his voice hollow.
Sophie and Teabing were seated on the divan, arms raised as their attacker had commanded. Langdon lay groaning on the floor. The monk's eyes fell immediately to the keystone on Teabing's lap.
Teabing's tone was defiant. "You will not be able to open it."
"My Teacher is very wise," the monk replied, inching closer, the gun shifting between Teabing and Sophie.
Sophie wondered where Teabing's manservant was. Didn't he hear Robert fall?
"Who is your teacher?" Teabing asked. "Perhaps we can make a financial arrangement."
"The Grail is priceless." He moved closer.
"You're bleeding," Teabing noted calmly, nodding to the monk's right ankle where a trickle of blood had run down his leg. "And you're limping."
"As do you," the monk replied, motioning to the metal crutches propped beside Teabing. "Now, hand me the keystone."
"You know of the keystone?" Teabing said, sounding surprised.
"Never mind what I know. Stand up slowly, and give it to me."
"Standing is difficult for me."
"Precisely. I would prefer nobody attempt any quick moves."
Teabing slipped his right hand through one of his crutches and grasped the keystone in his left. Lurching to his feet, he stood erect, palming the heavy cylinder in his left hand, and leaning 

unsteadily on his crutch with his right.
The monk closed to within a few feet, keeping the gun aimed directly at Teabing's head. Sophie watched, feeling helpless as the monk reached out to take the cylinder.
"You will not succeed," Teabing said. "Only the worthy can unlock this stone." 
God alone judges the worthy, Silas thought.
"It's quite heavy," the man on crutches said, his arm wavering now. "If you don't take it soon, I'm afraid I shall drop it!" He swayed perilously.
Silas stepped quickly forward to take the stone, and as he did, the man on crutches lost his balance. The crutch slid out from under him, and he began to topple sideways to his right. No! Silas lunged to save the stone, lowering his weapon in the process. But the keystone was moving away from him now. As the man fell to his right, his left hand swung backward, and the cylinder tumbled from his palm onto the couch. At the same instant, the metal crutch that had been sliding out from under the man seemed to accelerate, cutting a wide arc through the air toward Silas's leg.
Splinters of pain tore up Silas's body as the crutch made perfect contact with his cilice, crushing the barbs into his already raw flesh. Buckling, Silas crumpled to his knees, causing the belt to cut deeper still. The pistol discharged with a deafening roar, the bullet burying itself harmlessly in the floorboards as Silas fell. Before he could raise the gun and fire again, the woman's foot caught him square beneath the jaw. 
At the bottom of the driveway, Collet heard the gunshot. The muffled pop sent panic through his veins. With Fache on the way, Collet had already relinquished any hopes of claiming personal credit for finding Langdon tonight. But Collet would be damned if Fache's ego landed him in front of a Ministerial Review Board for negligent police procedure.
A weapon was discharged inside a private home! And you waited at the bottom of the driveway?
Collet knew the opportunity for a stealth approach had long since passed. He also knew if he stood idly by for another second, his entire career would be history by morning. Eyeing the estate's iron gate, he made his decision.
"Tie on, and pull it down."

In the distant recesses of his groggy mind, Robert Langdon had heard the gunshot. He'd also heard a scream of pain. His own? A jackhammer was boring a hole into the back of his cranium. Somewhere nearby, people were talking.
"Where the devil were you?" Teabing was yelling.
The manservant hurried in. "What happened? Oh my God! Who is that? I'll call the police!"
"Bloody hell! Don't call the police. Make yourself useful and get us something with which to restrain this monster."
"And some ice!" Sophie called after him.
Langdon drifted out again. More voices. Movement. Now he was seated on the divan. Sophie was holding an ice pack to his head. His skull ached. As Langdon's vision finally began to clear, he found himself staring at a body on the floor. Am I hallucinating? The massive body of an albino monk lay bound and gagged with duct tape. His chin was split open, and the robe over his right thigh was soaked with blood. He too appeared to be just now coming to.
Langdon turned to Sophie. "Who is that? What... happened?"
Teabing hobbled over. "You were rescued by a knight brandishing an Excalibur made by Acme Orthopedic."
Huh? Langdon tried to sit up.
Sophie's touch was shaken but tender. "Just give yourself a minute, Robert."
"I fear," Teabing said, "that I've just demonstrated for your lady friend the unfortunate benefit of my condition. It seems everyone underestimates you."
From his seat on the divan, Langdon gazed down at the monk and tried to imagine what had happened.
"He was wearing a cilice," Teabing explained.
"A what?"
Teabing pointed to a bloody strip of barbed leather that lay on the floor. "A Discipline belt. He wore it on his thigh. I took careful aim."
Langdon rubbed his head. He knew of Discipline belts. "But how... did you know?"

Teabing grinned. "Christianity is my field of study, Robert, and there are certain sects who wear their hearts on their sleeves." He pointed his crutch at the blood soaking through the monk's cloak. "As it were."
"Opus Dei," Langdon whispered, recalling recent media coverage of several prominent Boston businessmen who were members of Opus Dei. Apprehensive coworkers had falsely and publicly accused the men of wearing Discipline belts beneath their three-piece suits. In fact, the three men did no such thing. Like many members of Opus Dei, these businessmen were at the "supernumerary" stage and practiced no corporal mortification at all. They were devout Catholics, caring fathers to their children, and deeply dedicated members of the community. Not surprisingly, the media spotlighted their spiritual commitment only briefly before moving on to the shock value of the sect's more stringent "numerary" members... members like the monk now lying on the floor before Langdon.
Teabing was looking closely at the bloody belt. "But why would Opus Dei be trying to find the Holy Grail?"
Langdon was too groggy to consider it.
"Robert," Sophie said, walking to the wooden box. "What's this?" She was holding the small Rose inlay he had removed from the lid.
"It covered an engraving on the box. I think the text might tell us how to open the keystone."
Before Sophie and Teabing could respond, a sea of blue police lights and sirens erupted at the bottom of the hill and began snaking up the half-mile driveway.
Teabing frowned. "My friends, it seems we have a decision to make. And we'd better make it fast." 
CHAPTER 66
Collet and his agents burst through the front door of Sir Leigh Teabing's estate with their guns drawn. Fanning out, they began searching all the rooms on the first level. They found a bullet hole in the drawing room floor, signs of a struggle, a small amount of blood, a strange, barbed leather belt, and a partially used roll of duct tape. The entire level seemed deserted.
Just as Collet was about to divide his men to search the basement and grounds behind the house, he heard voices on the level above them.
"They're upstairs!"

Rushing up the wide staircase, Collet and his men moved room by room through the huge home, securing darkened bedrooms and hallways as they closed in on the sounds of voices. The sound seemed to be coming from the last bedroom on an exceptionally long hallway. The agents inched down the corridor, sealing off alternate exits.
As they neared the final bedroom, Collet could see the door was wide open. The voices had stopped suddenly, and had been replaced by an odd rumbling, like an engine.
Sidearm raised, Collet gave the signal. Reaching silently around the door frame, he found the light switch and flicked it on. Spinning into the room with men pouring in after him, Collet shouted and aimed his weapon at... nothing.
An empty guest bedroom. Pristine.
The rumbling sounds of an automobile engine poured from a black electronic panel on the wall beside the bed. Collet had seen these elsewhere in the house. Some kind of intercom system. He raced over. The panel had about a dozen labeled buttons:
STUDY... KITCHEN... LAUNDRY... CELLAR... 
So where the hell do I hear a car?
MASTER BEDROOM... SUN ROOM... BARN... LIBRARY... 
Barn! Collet was downstairs in seconds, running toward the back door, grabbing one of his agents on the way. The men crossed the rear lawn and arrived breathless at the front of a weathered gray barn. Even before they entered, Collet could hear the fading sounds of a car engine. He drew his weapon, rushed in, and flicked on the lights.
The right side of the barn was a rudimentary workshop—lawn-mowers, automotive tools, gardening supplies. A familiar intercom panel hung on the wall nearby. One of its buttons was flipped down, transmitting.
GUEST BEDROOM II. 
Collet wheeled, anger brimming. They lured us upstairs with the intercom! Searching the other side of the barn, he found a long line of horse stalls. No horses. Apparently the owner preferred a different kind of horsepower; the stalls had been converted into an impressive automotive parking facility. The collection was astonishing—a black Ferrari, a pristine Rolls-Royce, an antique Astin Martin sports coupe, a vintage Porsche 356.

The last stall was empty.
Collet ran over and saw oil stains on the stall floor. They can't get off the compound. The driveway and gate were barricaded with two patrol cars to prevent this very situation.
"Sir?" The agent pointed down the length of the stalls.
The barn's rear slider was wide open, giving way to a dark, muddy slope of rugged fields that stretched out into the night behind the barn. Collet ran to the door, trying to see out into the darkness. All he could make out was the faint shadow of a forest in the distance. No headlights. This wooded valley was probably crisscrossed by dozens of unmapped fire roads and hunting trails, but Collet was confident his quarry would never make the woods. "Get some men spread out down there. They're probably already stuck somewhere nearby. These fancy sports cars can't handle terrain."
"Um, sir?" The agent pointed to a nearby pegboard on which hung several sets of keys. The labels above the keys bore familiar names.
DAIMLER... ROLLS-ROYCE... ASTIN MARTIN... PORSCHE... 
The last peg was empty.
When Collet read the label above the empty peg, he knew he was in trouble. 
CHAPTER 67
The Range Rover was Java Black Pearl, four-wheel drive, standard transmission, with high-strength polypropylene lamps, rear light cluster fittings, and the steering wheel on the right.
Langdon was pleased he was not driving.
Teabing's manservant Rémy, on orders from his master, was doing an impressive job of maneuvering the vehicle across the moonlit fields behind Château Villette. With no headlights, he had crossed an open knoll and was now descending a long slope, moving farther away from the estate. He seemed to be heading toward a jagged silhouette of wooded land in the distance.
Langdon, cradling the keystone, turned in the passenger seat and eyed Teabing and Sophie in the back seat.

"How's your head, Robert?" Sophie asked, sounding concerned.
Langdon forced a pained smile. "Better, thanks." It was killing him.
Beside her, Teabing glanced over his shoulder at the bound and gagged monk lying in the cramped luggage area behind the back seat. Teabing had the monk's gun on his lap and looked like an old photo of a British safari chap posing over his kill.
"So glad you popped in this evening, Robert," Teabing said, grinning as if he were having fun for the first time in years.
"Sorry to get you involved in this, Leigh."
"Oh, please, I've waited my entire life to be involved." Teabing looked past Langdon out the windshield at the shadow of a long hedgerow. He tapped Rémy on the shoulder from behind. "Remember, no brake lights. Use the emergency brake if you need it. I want to get into the woods a bit. No reason to risk them seeing us from the house."
Rémy coasted to a crawl and guided the Range Rover through an opening in the hedge. As the vehicle lurched onto an overgrown pathway, almost immediately the trees overhead blotted out the moonlight.
I can't see a thing, Langdon thought, straining to distinguish any shapes at all in front of them. It was pitch black. Branches rubbed against the left side of the vehicle, and Rémy corrected in the other direction. Keeping the wheel more or less straight now, he inched ahead about thirty yards.
"You're doing beautifully, Rémy," Teabing said. "That should be far enough. Robert, if you could press that little blue button just below the vent there. See it?"
Langdon found the button and pressed it.
A muted yellow glow fanned out across the path in front of them, revealing thick underbrush on either side of the pathway. Fog lights, Langdon realized. They gave off just enough light to keep them on the path, and yet they were deep enough into the woods now that the lights would not give them away.
"Well, Rémy," Teabing chimed happily. "The lights are on. Our lives are in your hands."
"Where are we going?" Sophie asked.
"This trail continues about three kilometers into the forest," Teabing said. "Cutting across the estate and then arching north. Provided we don't hit any standing water or fallen trees, we shall emerge unscathed on the shoulder of highway five."

Unscathed. Langdon's head begged to differ. He turned his eyes down to his own lap, where the keystone was safely stowed in its wooden box. The inlaid Rose on the lid was back in place, and although his head felt muddled, Langdon was eager to remove the inlay again and examine the engraving beneath more closely. He unlatched the lid and began to raise it when Teabing laid a hand on his shoulder from behind.
"Patience, Robert," Teabing said. "It's bumpy and dark. God save us if we break anything. If you didn't recognize the language in the light, you won't do any better in the dark. Let's focus on getting away in one piece, shall we? There will be time for that very soon."
Langdon knew Teabing was right. With a nod, he relatched the box.
The monk in back was moaning now, struggling against his trusses. Suddenly, he began kicking wildly.
Teabing spun around and aimed the pistol over the seat. "I can't imagine your complaint, sir. You trespassed in my home and planted a nasty welt on the skull of a dear friend. I would be well within my rights to shoot you right now and leave you to rot in the woods."
The monk fell silent.
"Are you sure we should have brought him?" Langdon asked.
"Bloody well positive!" Teabing exclaimed. "You're wanted for murder, Robert. This scoundrel is your ticket to freedom. The police apparently want you badly enough to have tailed you to my home."
"My fault," Sophie said. "The armored car probably had a transmitter."
"Not the point," Teabing said. "I'm not surprised the police found you, but I am surprised that this Opus Dei character found you. From all you've told me, I can't imagine how this man could have tailed you to my home unless he had a contact either within the Judicial Police or within the Zurich Depository."
Langdon considered it. Bezu Fache certainly seemed intent on finding a scapegoat for tonight's murders. And Vernet had turned on them rather suddenly, although considering Langdon was being charged with four murders, the banker's change of heart seemed understandable.
"This monk is not working alone, Robert," Teabing said, "and until you learn who is behind all this, you both are in danger. The good news, my friend, is that you are now in the position of power. This monster behind me holds that information, and whoever is pulling his strings has got to be quite nervous right now."

Rémy was picking up speed, getting comfortable with the trail. They splashed through some water, climbed a small rise, and began descending again.
"Robert, could you be so kind as to hand me that phone?" Teabing pointed to the car phone on the dash. Langdon handed it back, and Teabing dialed a number. He waited for a very long time before someone answered. "Richard? Did I wake you? Of course, I did. Silly question. I'm sorry. I have a small problem. I'm feeling a bit off. Rémy and I need to pop up to the Isles for my treatments. Well, right away, actually. Sorry for the short notice. Can you have Elizabeth ready in about twenty minutes? I know, do the best you can. See you shortly." He hung up.
"Elizabeth?" Langdon said.
"My plane. She cost me a Queen's ransom."
Langdon turned full around and looked at him.
"What?" Teabing demanded. "You two can't expect to stay in France with the entire Judicial Police after you. London will be much safer."
Sophie had turned to Teabing as well. "You think we should leave the country?"
"My friends, I am far more influential in the civilized world than here in France. Furthermore, the Grail is believed to be in Great Britain. If we unlock the keystone, I am certain we will discover a map that indicates we have moved in the proper direction."
"You're running a big risk," Sophie said, "by helping us. You won't make any friends with the French police."
Teabing gave a wave of disgust. "I am finished with France. I moved here to find the keystone. That work is now done. I shan't care if I ever again see Château Villette."
Sophie sounded uncertain. "How will we get through airport security?"
Teabing chuckled. "I fly from Le Bourget—an executive airfield not far from here. French doctors make me nervous, so every fortnight, I fly north to take my treatments in England. I pay for certain special privileges at both ends. Once we're airborne, you can make a decision as to whether or not you'd like someone from the U.S. Embassy to meet us."
Langdon suddenly didn't want anything to do with the embassy. All he could think of was the keystone, the inscription, and whether it would all lead to the Grail. He wondered if Teabing was right about Britain. Admittedly most modern legends placed the Grail somewhere in the United Kingdom. Even King Arthur's mythical, Grail-rich Isle of Avalon was now believed to be none other than Glastonbury, England. Wherever the Grail lay, Langdon never imagined he would 

actually be looking for it. The Sangreal documents. The true history of Jesus Christ. The tomb of Mary Magdalene. He suddenly felt as if he were living in some kind of limbo tonight... a bubble where the real world could not reach him.
"Sir?" Rémy said. "Are you truly thinking of returning to England for good?"
"Rémy, you needn't worry," Teabing assured. "Just because I am returning to the Queen's realm does not mean I intend to subject my palate to bangers and mash for the rest of my days. I expect you will join me there permanently. I'm planning to buy a splendid villa in Devonshire, and we'll have all your things shipped up immediately. An adventure, Rémy. I say, an adventure!"
Langdon had to smile. As Teabing railed on about his plans for a triumphant return to Britain, Langdon felt himself caught up in the man's infectious enthusiasm.
Gazing absently out the window, Langdon watched the woods passing by, ghostly pale in the yellow blush of the fog lights. The side mirror was tipped inward, brushed askew by branches, and Langdon saw the reflection of Sophie sitting quietly in the back seat. He watched her for a long while and felt an unexpected upwelling of contentment. Despite his troubles tonight, Langdon was thankful to have landed in such good company.
After several minutes, as if suddenly sensing his eyes on her, Sophie leaned forward and put her hands on his shoulders, giving him a quick rub. "You okay?"
"Yeah," Langdon said. "Somehow."
Sophie sat back in her seat, and Langdon saw a quiet smile cross her lips. He realized that he too was now grinning. 
Wedged in the back of the Range Rover, Silas could barely breathe. His arms were wrenched backward and heavily lashed to his ankles with kitchen twine and duct tape. Every bump in the road sent pain shooting through his twisted shoulders. At least his captors had removed the cilice. Unable to inhale through the strip of tape over his mouth, he could only breathe through his nostrils, which were slowly clogging up due to the dusty rear cargo area into which he had been crammed. He began coughing.
"I think he's choking," the French driver said, sounding concerned.
The British man who had struck Silas with his crutch now turned and peered over the seat, frowning coldly at Silas. "Fortunately for you, we British judge man's civility not by his compassion for his friends, but by his compassion for his enemies." The Brit reached down and grabbed the duct tape on Silas's mouth. In one fast motion, he tore it off.

Silas felt as if his lips had just caught fire, but the air pouring into his lungs was sent from God.
"Whom do you work for?" the British man demanded.
"I do the work of God," Silas spat back through the pain in his jaw where the woman had kicked him.
"You belong to Opus Dei," the man said. It was not a question.
"You know nothing of who I am."
"Why does Opus Dei want the keystone?"
Silas had no intention of answering. The keystone was the link to the Holy Grail, and the Holy Grail was the key to protecting the faith.
I do the work of God. The Way is in peril.
Now, in the Range Rover, struggling against his bonds, Silas feared he had failed the Teacher and the bishop forever. He had no way even to contact them and tell them the terrible turn of events. My captors have the keystone! They will reach the Grail before we do! In the stifling darkness, Silas prayed. He let the pain of his body fuel his supplications.
A miracle, Lord. I need a miracle. Silas had no way of knowing that hours from now, he would get one. 
"Robert?" Sophie was still watching him. "A funny look just crossed your face."
Langdon glanced back at her, realizing his jaw was firmly set and his heart was racing. An incredible notion had just occurred to him. Could it really be that simple an explanation? "I need to use your cell phone, Sophie."
"Now?"
"I think I just figured something out."
"What?"
"I'll tell you in a minute. I need your phone."
Sophie looked wary. "I doubt Fache is tracing, but keep it under a minute just in case." She gave 

him her phone.
"How do I dial the States?"
"You need to reverse the charges. My service doesn't cover transatlantic."
Langdon dialed zero, knowing that the next sixty seconds might answer a question that had been puzzling him all night. 
CHAPTER 68
New York editor Jonas Faukman had just climbed into bed for the night when the telephone rang. A little late for callers, he grumbled, picking up the receiver.
An operator's voice asked him, "Will you accept charges for a collect call from Robert Langdon?"
Puzzled, Jonas turned on the light. "Uh... sure, okay."
The line clicked. "Jonas?"
"Robert? You wake me up and you charge me for it?"
"Jonas, forgive me," Langdon said. "I'll keep this very short. I really need to know. The manuscript I gave you. Have you—"
"Robert, I'm sorry, I know I said I'd send the edits out to you this week, but I'm swamped. Next Monday. I promise."
"I'm not worried about the edits. I need to know if you sent any copies out for blurbs without telling me?"
Faukman hesitated. Langdon's newest manuscript—an exploration of the history of goddess worship—included several sections about Mary Magdalene that were going to raise some eyebrows. Although the material was well documented and had been covered by others, Faukman had no intention of printing Advance Reading Copies of Langdon's book without at least a few endorsements from serious historians and art luminaries. Jonas had chosen ten big names in the art world and sent them all sections of the manuscript along with a polite letter asking if they would be willing to write a short endorsement for the jacket. In Faukman's experience, most people jumped at the opportunity to see their name in print.

"Jonas?" Langdon pressed. "You sent out my manuscript, didn't you?"
Faukman frowned, sensing Langdon was not happy about it. "The manuscript was clean, Robert, and I wanted to surprise you with some terrific blurbs."
A pause. "Did you send one to the curator of the Paris Louvre?"
"What do you think? Your manuscript referenced his Louvre collection several times, his books are in your bibliography, and the guy has some serious clout for foreign sales. Saunière was a no-brainer."
The silence on the other end lasted a long time. "When did you send it?"
"About a month ago. I also mentioned you would be in Paris soon and suggested you two chat. Did he ever call you to meet?" Faukman paused, rubbing his eyes. "Hold on, aren't you supposed to be in Paris this week?"
"I am in Paris."
Faukman sat upright. "You called me collect from Paris?"
"Take it out of my royalties, Jonas. Did you ever hear back from Saunière? Did he like the manuscript?"
"I don't know. I haven't yet heard from him."
"Well, don't hold your breath. I've got to run, but this explains a lot Thanks."
"Robert—"
But Langdon was gone.
Faukman hung up the phone, shaking his head in disbelief Authors, he thought. Even the sane ones are nuts. 
Inside the Range Rover, Leigh Teabing let out a guffaw. "Robert, you're saying you wrote a manuscript that delves into a secret society, and your editor sent a copy to that secret society?"
Langdon slumped. "Evidently."
"A cruel coincidence, my friend."

Coincidence has nothing to do with it, Langdon knew. Asking Jacques Saunière to endorse a manuscript on goddess worship was as obvious as asking Tiger Woods to endorse a book on golf. Moreover, it was virtually guaranteed that any book on goddess worship would have to mention the Priory of Sion.
"Here's the million-dollar question," Teabing said, still chuckling. "Was your position on the Priory favorable or unfavorable?"
Langdon could hear Teabing's true meaning loud and clear. Many historians questioned why the Priory was still keeping the Sangreal documents hidden. Some felt the information should have been shared with the world long ago. "I took no position on the Priory's actions."
"You mean lack thereof."
Langdon shrugged. Teabing was apparently on the side of making the documents public. "I simply provided history on the brotherhood and described them as a modern goddess worship society, keepers of the Grail, and guardians of ancient documents."
Sophie looked at him. "Did you mention the keystone?"
Langdon winced. He had. Numerous times. "I talked about the supposed keystone as an example of the lengths to which the Priory would go to protect the Sangreal documents."
Sophie looked amazed. "I guess that explains P.S. Find Robert Langdon."
Langdon sensed it was actually something else in the manuscript that had piqued Saunière's interest, but that topic was something he would discuss with Sophie when they were alone.
"So," Sophie said, "you lied to Captain Fache."
"What?" Langdon demanded.
"You told him you had never corresponded with my grandfather."
"I didn't! My editor sent him a manuscript."
"Think about it, Robert. If Captain Fache didn't find the envelope in which your editor sent the manuscript, he would have to conclude that you sent it." She paused. "Or worse, that you hand-delivered it and lied about it." 
When the Range Rover arrived at Le Bourget Airfield, Rémy drove to a small hangar at the far end 

of the airstrip. As they approached, a tousled man in wrinkled khakis hurried from the hangar, waved, and slid open the enormous corrugated metal door to reveal a sleek white jet within.
Langdon stared at the glistening fuselage. "That's Elizabeth?"
Teabing grinned. "Beats the bloody Chunnel."
The man in khakis hurried toward them, squinting into the headlights. "Almost ready, sir," he called in a British accent. "My apologies for the delay, but you took me by surprise and—" He stopped short as the group unloaded. He looked at Sophie and Langdon, and then Teabing.
Teabing said, "My associates and I have urgent business in London. We've no time to waste. Please prepare to depart immediately." As he spoke, Teabing took the pistol out of the vehicle and handed it to Langdon.
The pilot's eyes bulged at the sight of the weapon. He walked over to Teabing and whispered, "Sir, my humble apologies, but my diplomatic flight allowance provides only for you and your manservant. I cannot take your guests."
"Richard," Teabing said, smiling warmly, "two thousand pounds sterling and that loaded gun say you can take my guests." He motioned to the Range Rover. "And the unfortunate fellow in the back." 
CHAPTER 69
The Hawker 731's twin Garrett TFE-731 engines thundered, powering the plane skyward with gut-wrenching force. Outside the window, Le Bourget Airfield dropped away with startling speed.
I'm fleeing the country, Sophie thought, her body forced back into the leather seat. Until this moment, she had believed her game of cat and mouse with Fache would be somehow justifiable to the Ministry of Defense. I was attempting to protect an innocent man. I was trying to fulfill my grandfather's dying wishes. That window of opportunity, Sophie knew, had just closed. She was leaving the country, without documentation, accompanying a wanted man, and transporting a bound hostage. If a "line of reason" had ever existed, she had just crossed it. At almost the speed of sound.
Sophie was seated with Langdon and Teabing near the front of the cabin—the Fan Jet Executive Elite Design, according to the gold medallion on the door. Their plush swivel chairs were bolted to tracks on the floor and could be repositioned and locked around a rectangular hardwood table. A mini-boardroom. The dignified surroundings, however, did little to camouflage the less than 

dignified state of affairs in the rear of the plane where, in a separate seating area near the rest room, Teabing's manservant Rémy sat with the pistol in hand, begrudgingly carrying out Teabing's orders to stand guard over the bloody monk who lay trussed at his feet like a piece of luggage.
"Before we turn our attention to the keystone," Teabing said, "I was wondering if you would permit me a few words." He sounded apprehensive, like a father about to give the birds-and-the-bees lecture to his children. "My friends, I realize I am but a guest on this journey, and I am honored as such. And yet, as someone who has spent his life in search of the Grail, I feel it is my duty to warn you that you are about to step onto a path from which there is no return, regardless of the dangers involved." He turned to Sophie. "Miss Neveu, your grandfather gave you this cryptex in hopes you would keep the secret of the Holy Grail alive."
"Yes."
"Understandably, you feel obliged to follow the trail wherever it leads."
Sophie nodded, although she felt a second motivation still burning within her. The truth about my family. Despite Langdon's assurances that the keystone had nothing to do with her past, Sophie still sensed something deeply personal entwined within this mystery, as if this cryptex, forged by her grandfather's own hands, were trying to speak to her and offer some kind of resolution to the emptiness that had haunted her all these years.
"Your grandfather and three others died tonight," Teabing continued, "and they did so to keep this keystone away from the Church. Opus Dei came within inches tonight of possessing it. You understand, I hope, that this puts you in a position of exceptional responsibility. You have been handed a torch. A two-thousand-year-old flame that cannot be allowed to go out. This torch cannot fall into the wrong hands." He paused, glancing at the rosewood box. "I realize you have been given no choice in this matter, Miss Neveu, but considering what is at stake here, you must either fully embrace this responsibility... or you must pass that responsibility to someone else."
"My grandfather gave the cryptex to me. I'm sure he thought I could handle the responsibility."
Teabing looked encouraged but unconvinced. "Good. A strong will is necessary. And yet, I am curious if you understand that successfully unlocking the keystone will bring with it a far greater trial."
"How so?"
"My dear, imagine that you are suddenly holding a map that reveals the location of the Holy Grail. In that moment, you will be in possession of a truth capable of altering history forever. You will be the keeper of a truth that man has sought for centuries. You will be faced with the responsibility of revealing that truth to the world. The individual who does so will be revered by many and despised by many. The question is whether you will have the necessary strength to carry out that task."

Sophie paused. "I'm not sure that is my decision to make."
Teabing's eyebrows arched. "No? If not the possessor of the keystone, then who?"
"The brotherhood who has successfully protected the secret for so long."
"The Priory?" Teabing looked skeptical. "But how? The brotherhood was shattered tonight. Decapitated, as you so aptly put it. Whether they were infiltrated by some kind of eavesdropping or by a spy within their ranks, we will never know, but the fact remains that someone got to them and uncovered the identities of their four top members. I would not trust anyone who stepped forward from the brotherhood at this point."
"So what do you suggest?" Langdon asked.
"Robert, you know as well as I do that the Priory has not protected the truth all these years to have it gather dust until eternity. They have been waiting for the right moment in history to share their secret. A time when the world is ready to handle the truth."
"And you believe that moment has arrived?" Langdon asked.
"Absolutely. It could not be more obvious. All the historical signs are in place, and if the Priory did not intend to make their secret known very soon, why has the Church now attacked?"
Sophie argued, "The monk has not yet told us his purpose."
"The monk's purpose is the Church's purpose," Teabing replied, "to destroy the documents that reveal the great deception. The Church came closer tonight than they have ever come, and the Priory has put its trust in you, Miss Neveu. The task of saving the Holy Grail clearly includes carrying out the Priory's final wishes of sharing the truth with the world."
Langdon intervened. "Leigh, asking Sophie to make that decision is quite a load to drop on someone who only an hour ago learned the Sangreal documents exist."
Teabing sighed. "I apologize if I am pressing, Miss Neveu. Clearly I have always believed these documents should be made public, but in the end the decision belongs to you. I simply feel it is important that you begin to think about what happens should we succeed in opening the keystone."
"Gentlemen," Sophie said, her voice firm. "To quote your words, 'You do not find the Grail, the Grail finds you.' I am going to trust that the Grail has found me for a reason, and when the time comes, I will know what to do."
Both of them looked startled.

"So then," she said, motioning to the rosewood box. "Let's move on." 
CHAPTER 70
Standing in the drawing room of Château Villette, Lieutenant Collet watched the dying fire and felt despondent. Captain Fache had arrived moments earlier and was now in the next room, yelling into the phone, trying to coordinate the failed attempt to locate the missing Range Rover.
It could be anywhere by now, Collet thought.
Having disobeyed Fache's direct orders and lost Langdon for a second time, Collet was grateful that PTS had located a bullet hole in the floor, which at least corroborated Collet's claims that a shot had been fired. Still, Fache's mood was sour, and Collet sensed there would be dire repercussions when the dust settled.
Unfortunately, the clues they were turning up here seemed to shed no light at all on what was going on or who was involved. The black Audi outside had been rented in a false name with false credit card numbers, and the prints in the car matched nothing in the Interpol database.
Another agent hurried into the living room, his eyes urgent. "Where's Captain Fache?"
Collet barely looked up from the burning embers. "He's on the phone."
"I'm off the phone," Fache snapped, stalking into the room. "What have you got?"
The second agent said, "Sir, Central just heard from André Vernet at the Depository Bank of Zurich. He wants to talk to you privately. He is changing his story."
"Oh?" Fache said.
Now Collet looked up.
"Vernet is admitting that Langdon and Neveu spent time inside his bank tonight."
"We figured that out," Fache said. "Why did Vernet lie about it?"
"He said he'll talk only to you, but he's agreed to cooperate fully."
"In exchange for what?"

"For our keeping his bank's name out of the news and also for helping him recover some stolen property. It sounds like Langdon and Neveu stole something from Saunière's account."
"What?" Collet blurted. "How?"
Fache never flinched, his eyes riveted on the second agent. "What did they steal?"
"Vernet didn't elaborate, but he sounds like he's willing to do anything to get it back."
Collet tried to imagine how this could happen. Maybe Langdon and Neveu had held a bank employee at gunpoint? Maybe they forced Vernet to open Saunière's account and facilitate an escape in the armored truck. As feasible as it was, Collet was having trouble believing Sophie Neveu could be involved in anything like that.
From the kitchen, another agent yelled to Fache. "Captain? I'm going through Mr. Teabing's speed dial numbers, and I'm on the phone with Le Bourget Airfield. I've got some bad news." 
Thirty seconds later, Fache was packing up and preparing to leave Château Villette. He had just learned that Teabing kept a private jet nearby at Le Bourget Airfield and that the plane had taken off about a half hour ago.
The Bourget representative on the phone had claimed not to know who was on the plane or where it was headed. The takeoff had been unscheduled, and no flight plan had been logged. Highly illegal, even for a small airfield. Fache was certain that by applying the right pressure, he could get the answers he was looking for.
"Lieutenant Collet," Fache barked, heading for the door. "I have no choice but to leave you in charge of the PTS investigation here. Try to do something right for a change." 
CHAPTER 71
As the Hawker leveled off, with its nose aimed for England, Langdon carefully lifted the rosewood box from his lap, where he had been protecting it during takeoff. Now, as he set the box on the table, he could sense Sophie and Teabing leaning forward with anticipation.
Unlatching the lid and opening the box, Langdon turned his attention not to the lettered dials of the cryptex, but rather to the tiny hole on the underside of the box lid. Using the tip of a pen, he carefully removed the inlaid Rose on top and revealed the text beneath it. Sub Rosa, he mused, hoping a fresh look at the text would bring clarity. Focusing all his energies, Langdon studied the 

strange text. 
After several seconds, he began to feel the initial frustration resurfacing. "Leigh, I just can't seem to place it."
From where Sophie was seated across the table, she could not yet see the text, but Langdon's inability to immediately identify the language surprised her. My grandfather spoke a language so obscure that even a symbologist can't identify it? She quickly realized she should not find this surprising. This would not be the first secret Jacques Saunière had kept from his granddaughter. 
Opposite Sophie, Leigh Teabing felt ready to burst. Eager for his chance to see the text, he quivered with excitement, leaning in, trying to see around Langdon, who was still hunched over the box.
"I don't know," Langdon whispered intently. "My first guess is a Semitic, but now I'm not so sure. Most primary Semitics include nekkudot. This has none."
"Probably ancient," Teabing offered.
"Nekkudot?" Sophie inquired.
Teabing never took his eyes from the box. "Most modern Semitic alphabets have no vowels and use nekkudot—tiny dots and dashes written either below or within the consonants—to indicate what vowel sound accompanies them. Historically speaking, nekkudot are a relatively modern addition to language."

Langdon was still hovering over the script. "A Sephardic transliteration, perhaps...?"
Teabing could bear it no longer. "Perhaps if I just..." Reaching over, he edged the box away from Langdon and pulled it toward himself. No doubt Langdon had a solid familiarity with the standard ancients—Greek, Latin, the Romances—but from the fleeting glance Teabing had of this language, he thought it looked more specialized, possibly a Rashi script or a STA'M with crowns.
Taking a deep breath, Teabing feasted his eyes upon the engraving. He said nothing for a very long time. With each passing second, Teabing felt his confidence deflating. "I'm astonished," he said. "This language looks like nothing I've ever seen!"
Langdon slumped.
"Might I see it?" Sophie asked.
Teabing pretended not to hear her. "Robert, you said earlier that you thought you'd seen something like this before?"
Langdon looked vexed. "I thought so. I'm not sure. The script looks familiar somehow."
"Leigh?" Sophie repeated, clearly not appreciating being left out of the discussion. "Might I have a look at the box my grandfather made?"
"Of course, dear," Teabing said, pushing it over to her. He hadn't meant to sound belittling, and yet Sophie Neveu was light-years out of her league. If a British Royal Historian and a Harvard symbologist could not even identify the language—
"Aah," Sophie said, seconds after examining the box. "I should have guessed."
Teabing and Langdon turned in unison, staring at her.
"Guessed what?" Teabing demanded.
Sophie shrugged. "Guessed that this would be the language my grandfather would have used."
"You're saying you can read this text?" Teabing exclaimed.
"Quite easily," Sophie chimed, obviously enjoying herself now. "My grandfather taught me this language when I was only six years old. I'm fluent." She leaned across the table and fixed Teabing with an admonishing glare. "And frankly, sir, considering your allegiance to the Crown, I'm a little surprised you didn't recognize it."
In a flash, Langdon knew.

No wonder the script looks so damned familiar!
Several years ago, Langdon had attended an event at Harvard's Fogg Museum. Harvard dropout Bill Gates had returned to his alma mater to lend to the museum one of his priceless acquisitions—eighteen sheets of paper he had recently purchased at auction from the Armand Hammar Estate.
His winning bid—a cool $30.8 million.
The author of the pages—Leonardo da Vinci.
The eighteen folios—now known as Leonardo's Codex Leicester after their famous owner, the Earl of Leicester—were all that remained of one of Leonardo's most fascinating notebooks: essays and drawings outlining Da Vinci's progressive theories on astronomy, geology, archaeology, and hydrology.
Langdon would never forget his reaction after waiting in line and finally viewing the priceless parchment. Utter letdown. The pages were unintelligible. Despite being beautifully preserved and written in an impeccably neat penmanship—crimson ink on cream paper—the codex looked like gibberish. At first Langdon thought he could not read them because Da Vinci wrote his notebooks in an archaic Italian. But after studying them more closely, he realized he could not identify a single Italian word, or even one letter.
"Try this, sir," whispered the female docent at the display case. She motioned to a hand mirror affixed to the display on a chain. Langdon picked it up and examined the text in the mirror's surface.
Instantly it was clear.
Langdon had been so eager to peruse some of the great thinker's ideas that he had forgotten one of the man's numerous artistic talents was an ability to write in a mirrored script that was virtually illegible to anyone other than himself. Historians still debated whether Da Vinci wrote this way simply to amuse himself or to keep people from peering over his shoulder and stealing his ideas, but the point was moot. Da Vinci did as he pleased. 
Sophie smiled inwardly to see that Robert understood her meaning. "I can read the first few words," she said. "It's English."
Teabing was still sputtering. "What's going on?"
"Reverse text," Langdon said. "We need a mirror."

"No we don't," Sophie said. "I bet this veneer is thin enough." She lifted the rosewood box up to a canister light on the wall and began examining the underside of the lid. Her grandfather couldn't actually write in reverse, so he always cheated by writing normally and then flipping the paper over and tracing the reversed impression. Sophie's guess was that he had wood-burned normal text into a block of wood and then run the back of the block through a sander until the wood was paper thin and the wood-burning could be seen through the wood. Then he'd simply flipped the piece over, and laid it in.
As Sophie moved the lid closer to the light, she saw she was right. The bright beam sifted through the thin layer of wood, and the script appeared in reverse on the underside of the lid.
Instantly legible.
"English," Teabing croaked, hanging his head in shame. "My native tongue." 
At the rear of the plane, Rémy Legaludec strained to hear beyond the rumbling engines, but the conversation up front was inaudible. Rémy did not like the way the night was progressing. Not at all. He looked down at the bound monk at his feet. The man lay perfectly still now, as if in a trance of acceptance, or perhaps, in silent prayer for deliverance. 
CHAPTER 72
Fifteen thousand feet in the air, Robert Langdon felt the physical world fade away as all of his thoughts converged on Saunière's mirror-image poem, which was illuminated through the lid of the box.

Sophie quickly found some paper and copied it down longhand. When she was done, the three of them took turns reading the text. It was like some kind of archaeological crossword... a riddle that promised to reveal how to open the cryptex. Langdon read the verse slowly.
An ancient word of wisdom frees this scroll... and helps us keep her scatter'd family whole... a headstone praised by templars is the key... and atbash will reveal the truth to thee.
Before Langdon could even ponder what ancient password the verse was trying to reveal, he felt something far more fundamental resonate within him—the meter of the poem. Iambic pentameter.
Langdon had come across this meter often over the years while researching secret societies across Europe, including just last year in the Vatican Secret Archives. For centuries, iambic pentameter had been a preferred poetic meter of outspoken literati across the globe, from the ancient Greek writer Archilochus to Shakespeare, Milton, Chaucer, and Voltaire—bold souls who chose to write their social commentaries in a meter that many of the day believed had mystical properties. The roots of iambic pentameter were deeply pagan.
Iambs. Two syllables with opposite emphasis. Stressed and unstressed. Yin yang. A balanced pair. Arranged in strings of five. Pentameter. Five for the pentacle of Venus and the sacred feminine.
"It's pentameter!" Teabing blurted, turning to Langdon. "And the verse is in English! La lingua pura!"
Langdon nodded. The Priory, like many European secret societies at odds with the Church, had considered English the only European pure language for centuries. Unlike French, Spanish, and Italian, which were rooted in Latin—the tongue of the Vatican—English was linguistically removed from Rome's propaganda machine, and therefore became a sacred, secret tongue for those brotherhoods educated enough to learn it.

"This poem," Teabing gushed, "references not only the Grail, but the Knights Templar and the scattered family of Mary Magdalene! What more could we ask for?"
"The password," Sophie said, looking again at the poem. "It sounds like we need some kind of ancient word of wisdom?"
"Abracadabra?" Teabing ventured, his eyes twinkling.
A word of five letters, Langdon thought, pondering the staggering number of ancient words that might be considered words of wisdom—selections from mystic chants, astrological prophecies, secret society inductions, Wicca incantations, Egyptian magic spells, pagan mantras—the list was endless.
"The password," Sophie said, "appears to have something to do with the Templars." She read the text aloud. " 'A headstone praised by Templars is the key.' "
"Leigh," Langdon said, "you're the Templar specialist. Any ideas?"
Teabing was silent for several seconds and then sighed. "Well, a headstone is obviously a grave marker of some sort. It's possible the poem is referencing a gravestone the Templars praised at the tomb of Magdalene, but that doesn't help us much because we have no idea where her tomb is."
"The last line," Sophie said, "says that Atbash will reveal the truth. I've heard that word. Atbash."
"I'm not surprised," Langdon replied. "You probably heard it in Cryptology 101. The Atbash Cipher is one of the oldest codes known to man."
Of course! Sophie thought. The famous Hebrew encoding system.
The Atbash Cipher had indeed been part of Sophie's early cryptology training. The cipher dated back to 500 B.C. and was now used as a classroom example of a basic rotational substitution scheme. A common form of Jewish cryptogram, the Atbash Cipher was a simple substitution code based on the twenty-two-letter Hebrew alphabet. In Atbash, the first letter was substituted by the last letter, the second letter by the next to last letter, and so on.
"Atbash is sublimely appropriate," Teabing said. "Text encrypted with Atbash is found throughout the Kabbala, the Dead Sea Scrolls, and even the Old Testament. Jewish scholars and mystics are still finding hidden meanings using Atbash. The Priory certainly would include the Atbash Cipher as part of their teachings."
"The only problem," Langdon said, "is that we don't have anything on which to apply the cipher."

Teabing sighed. "There must be a code word on the headstone. We must find this headstone praised by Templars."
Sophie sensed from the grim look on Langdon's face that finding the Templar headstone would be no small feat.
Atbash is the key, Sophie thought. But we don't have a door.
It was three minutes later that Teabing heaved a frustrated sigh and shook his head. "My friends, I'm stymied. Let me ponder this while I get us some nibblies and check on Rémy and our guest." He stood up and headed for the back of the plane.
Sophie felt tired as she watched him go.
Outside the window, the blackness of the predawn was absolute. Sophie felt as if she were being hurtled through space with no idea where she would land. Having grown up solving her grandfather's riddles, she had the uneasy sense right now that this poem before them contained information they still had not seen.
There is more there, she told herself. Ingeniously hidden... but present nonetheless.
Also plaguing her thoughts was a fear that what they eventually found inside this cryptex would not be as simple as "a map to the Holy Grail." Despite Teabing's and Langdon's confidence that the truth lay just within the marble cylinder, Sophie had solved enough of her grandfather's treasure hunts to know that Jacques Saunière did not give up his secrets easily. 
CHAPTER 73
Bourget Airfield's night shift air traffic controller had been dozing before a blank radar screen when the captain of the Judicial Police practically broke down his door.
"Teabing's jet," Bezu Fache blared, marching into the small tower, "where did it go?"
The controller's initial response was a babbling, lame attempt to protect the privacy of their British client—one of the airfield's most respected customers. It failed miserably.
"Okay," Fache said, "I am placing you under arrest for permitting a private plane to take off without registering a flight plan." Fache motioned to another officer, who approached with handcuffs, and the traffic controller felt a surge of terror. He thought of the newspaper articles debating whether the nation's police captain was a hero or a menace. That question had just been answered.

"Wait!" the controller heard himself whimper at the sight of the handcuffs. "I can tell you this much. Sir Leigh Teabing makes frequent trips to London for medical treatments. He has a hangar at Biggin Hill Executive Airport in Kent. On the outskirts of London."
Fache waved off the man with the cuffs. "Is Biggin Hill his destination tonight?"
"I don't know," the controller said honestly. "The plane left on its usual tack, and his last radar contact suggested the United Kingdom. Biggin Hill is an extremely likely guess."
"Did he have others onboard?"
"I swear, sir, there is no way for me to know that. Our clients can drive directly to their hangars, and load as they please. Who is onboard is the responsibility of the customs officials at the receiving airport."
Fache checked his watch and gazed out at the scattering of jets parked in front of the terminal. "If they're going to Biggin Hill, how long until they land?"
The controller fumbled through his records. "It's a short flight. His plane could be on the ground by... around six-thirty. Fifteen minutes from now."
Fache frowned and turned to one of his men. "Get a transport up here. I'm going to London. And get me the Kent local police. Not British MI5. I want this quiet. Kent local. Tell them I want Teabing's plane to be permitted to land. Then I want it surrounded on the tarmac. Nobody deplanes until I get there." 
CHAPTER 74
"You're quiet," Langdon said, gazing across the Hawker's cabin at Sophie.
"Just tired," she replied. "And the poem. I don't know."
Langdon was feeling the same way. The hum of the engines and the gentle rocking of the plane were hypnotic, and his head still throbbed where he'd been hit by the monk. Teabing was still in the back of the plane, and Langdon decided to take advantage of the moment alone with Sophie to tell her something that had been on his mind. "I think I know part of the reason why your grandfather conspired to put us together. I think there's something he wanted me to explain to you."
"The history of the Holy Grail and Mary Magdalene isn't enough?"

Langdon felt uncertain how to proceed. "The rift between you. The reason you haven't spoken to him in ten years. I think maybe he was hoping I could somehow make that right by explaining what drove you apart."
Sophie squirmed in her seat. "I haven't told you what drove us apart."
Langdon eyed her carefully. "You witnessed a sex rite. Didn't you?"
Sophie recoiled. "How do you know that?"
"Sophie, you told me you witnessed something that convinced you your grandfather was in a secret society. And whatever you saw upset you enough that you haven't spoken to him since. I know a fair amount about secret societies. It doesn't take the brains of Da Vinci to guess what you saw."
Sophie stared.
"Was it in the spring?" Langdon asked. "Sometime around the equinox? Mid-March?"
Sophie looked out the window. "I was on spring break from university. I came home a few days early."
"You want to tell me about it?"
"I'd rather not." She turned suddenly back to Langdon, her eyes welling with emotion. "I don't know what I saw."
"Were both men and women present?"
After a beat, she nodded.
"Dressed in white and black?"
She wiped her eyes and then nodded, seeming to open up a little. "The women were in white gossamer gowns... with golden shoes. They held golden orbs. The men wore black tunics and black shoes."
Langdon strained to hide his emotion, and yet he could not believe what he was hearing. Sophie Neveu had unwittingly witnessed a two-thousand-year-old sacred ceremony. "Masks?" he asked, keeping his voice calm. "Androgynous masks?"
"Yes. Everyone. Identical masks. White on the women. Black on the men."
Langdon had read descriptions of this ceremony and understood its mystic roots. "It's called Hieros 

Gamos," he said softly. "It dates back more than two thousand years. Egyptian priests and priestesses performed it regularly to celebrate the reproductive power of the female," He paused, leaning toward her. "And if you witnessed Hieros Gamos without being properly prepared to understand its meaning, I imagine it would be pretty shocking."
Sophie said nothing.
"Hieros Gamos is Greek," he continued. "It means sacred marriage."
"The ritual I saw was no marriage."
"Marriage as in union, Sophie."
"You mean as in sex."
"No."
"No?" she said, her olive eyes testing him.
Langdon backpedaled. "Well... yes, in a manner of speaking, but not as we understand it today." He explained that although what she saw probably looked like a sex ritual, Hieros Gamos had nothing to do with eroticism. It was a spiritual act. Historically, intercourse was the act through which male and female experienced God. The ancients believed that the male was spiritually incomplete until he had carnal knowledge of the sacred feminine. Physical union with the female remained the sole means through which man could become spiritually complete and ultimately achieve gnosis—knowledge of the divine. Since the days of Isis, sex rites had been considered man's only bridge from earth to heaven. "By communing with woman," Langdon said, "man could achieve a climactic instant when his mind went totally blank and he could see God."
Sophie looked skeptical. "Orgasm as prayer?"
Langdon gave a noncommittal shrug, although Sophie was essentially correct. Physiologically speaking, the male climax was accompanied by a split second entirely devoid of thought. A brief mental vacuum. A moment of clarity during which God could be glimpsed. Meditation gurus achieved similar states of thoughtlessness without sex and often described Nirvana as a never-ending spiritual orgasm.
"Sophie," Langdon said quietly, "it's important to remember that the ancients' view of sex was entirely opposite from ours today. Sex begot new life—the ultimate miracle—and miracles could be performed only by a god. The ability of the woman to produce life from her womb made her sacred. A god. Intercourse was the revered union of the two halves of the human spirit—male and female—through which the male could find spiritual wholeness and communion with God. What you saw was not about sex, it was about spirituality. The Hieros Gamos ritual is not a perversion. 

It's a deeply sacrosanct ceremony."
His words seemed to strike a nerve. Sophie had been remarkably poised all evening, but now, for the first time, Langdon saw the aura of composure beginning to crack. Tears materialized in her eyes again, and she dabbed them away with her sleeve.
He gave her a moment. Admittedly, the concept of sex as a pathway to God was mind-boggling at first. Langdon's Jewish students always looked flabbergasted when he first told them that the early Jewish tradition involved ritualistic sex. In the Temple, no less. Early Jews believed that the Holy of Holies in Solomon's Temple housed not only God but also His powerful female equal, Shekinah. Men seeking spiritual wholeness came to the Temple to visit priestesses—or hierodules—with whom they made love and experienced the divine through physical union. The Jewish tetragrammaton YHWH—the sacred name of God—in fact derived from Jehovah, an androgynous physical union between the masculine Jah and the pre-Hebraic name for Eve, Havah.
"For the early Church," Langdon explained in a soft voice, "mankind's use of sex to commune directly with God posed a serious threat to the Catholic power base. It left the Church out of the loop, undermining their self-proclaimed status as the sole conduit to God. For obvious reasons, they worked hard to demonize sex and recast it as a disgusting and sinful act. Other major religions did the same."
Sophie was silent, but Langdon sensed she was starting to understand her grandfather better. Ironically, Langdon had made this same point in a class lecture earlier this semester. "Is it surprising we feel conflicted about sex?" he asked his students. "Our ancient heritage and our very physiologies tell us sex is natural—a cherished route to spiritual fulfillment—and yet modern religion decries it as shameful, teaching us to fear our sexual desire as the hand of the devil."
Langdon decided not to shock his students with the fact that more than a dozen secret societies around the world—many of them quite influential—still practiced sex rites and kept the ancient traditions alive. Tom Cruise's character in the film Eyes Wide Shut discovered this the hard way when he sneaked into a private gathering of ultraelite Manhattanites only to find himself witnessing Hieros Gamos. Sadly, the filmmakers had gotten most of the specifics wrong, but the basic gist was there—a secret society communing to celebrate the magic of sexual union.
"Professor Langdon?" A male student in back raised his hand, sounding hopeful. "Are you saying that instead of going to chapel, we should have more sex?"
Langdon chuckled, not about to take the bait. From what he'd heard about Harvard parties, these kids were having more than enough sex. "Gentlemen," he said, knowing he was on tender ground, "might I offer a suggestion for all of you. Without being so bold as to condone premarital sex, and without being so naive as to think you're all chaste angels, I will give you this bit of advice about your sex lives."

All the men in the audience leaned forward, listening intently.
"The next time you find yourself with a woman, look in your heart and see if you cannot approach sex as a mystical, spiritual act. Challenge yourself to find that spark of divinity that man can only achieve through union with the sacred feminine."
The women smiled knowingly, nodding.
The men exchanged dubious giggles and off-color jokes.
Langdon sighed. College men were still boys. 
Sophie's forehead felt cold as she pressed it against the plane's window and stared blankly into the void, trying to process what Langdon had just told her. She felt a new regret well within her. Ten years. She pictured the stacks of unopened letters her grandfather had sent her. I will tell Robert everything. Without turning from the window, Sophie began to speak. Quietly. Fearfully.
As she began to recount what had happened that night, she felt herself drifting back... alighting in the woods outside her grandfather's Normandy château... searching the deserted house in confusion... hearing the voices below her... and then finding the hidden door. She inched down the stone staircase, one step at a time, into that basement grotto. She could taste the earthy air. Cool and light. It was March. In the shadows of her hiding place on the staircase, she watched as the strangers swayed and chanted by flickering orange candles.
I'm dreaming, Sophie told herself. This is a dream. What else could this be?
The women and men were staggered, black, white, black, white. The women's beautiful gossamer gowns billowed as they raised in their right hands golden orbs and called out in unison, "I was with you in the beginning, in the dawn of all that is holy, I bore you from the womb before the start of day."
The women lowered their orbs, and everyone rocked back and forth as if in a trance. They were revering something in the center of the circle.
What are they looking at?
The voices accelerated now. Louder. Faster.
"The woman whom you behold is love!" The women called, raising their orbs again.
The men responded, "She has her dwelling in eternity!"

The chanting grew steady again. Accelerating. Thundering now. Faster. The participants stepped inward and knelt.
In that instant, Sophie could finally see what they were all watching.
On a low, ornate altar in the center of the circle lay a man. He was naked, positioned on his back, and wearing a black mask. Sophie instantly recognized his body and the birthmark on his shoulder. She almost cried out. Grand-père! This image alone would have shocked Sophie beyond belief, and yet there was more.
Straddling her grandfather was a naked woman wearing a white mask, her luxuriant silver hair flowing out behind it. Her body was plump, far from perfect, and she was gyrating in rhythm to the chanting—making love to Sophie's grandfather.
Sophie wanted to turn and run, but she couldn't. The stone walls of the grotto imprisoned her as the chanting rose to a fever pitch. The circle of participants seemed almost to be singing now, the noise rising in crescendo to a frenzy. With a sudden roar, the entire room seemed to erupt in climax. Sophie could not breathe. She suddenly realized she was quietly sobbing. She turned and staggered silently up the stairs, out of the house, and drove trembling back to Paris. 
CHAPTER 75
The chartered turboprop was just passing over the twinkling lights of Monaco when Aringarosa hung up on Fache for the second time. He reached for the airsickness bag again but felt too drained even to be sick.
Just let it be over!
Fache's newest update seemed unfathomable, and yet almost nothing tonight made sense anymore. What is going on? Everything had spiraled wildly out of control. What have I gotten Silas into? What have I gotten myself into!
On shaky legs, Aringarosa walked to the cockpit. "I need to change destinations."
The pilot glanced over his shoulder and laughed. "You're joking, right?"
"No. I have to get to London immediately."
"Father, this is a charter flight, not a taxi."

"I will pay you extra, of course. How much? London is only one hour farther north and requires almost no change of direction, so—"
"It's not a question of money, Father, there are other issues."
"Ten thousand euro. Right now."
The pilot turned, his eyes wide with shock. "How much? What kind of priest carries that kind of cash?"
Aringarosa walked back to his black briefcase, opened it, and removed one of the bearer bonds. He handed it to the pilot.
"What is this?" the pilot demanded.
"A ten-thousand-euro bearer bond drawn on the Vatican Bank."
The pilot looked dubious.
"It's the same as cash."
"Only cash is cash," the pilot said, handing the bond back.
Aringarosa felt weak as he steadied himself against the cockpit door. "This is a matter of life or death. You must help me. I need to get to London."
The pilot eyed the bishop's gold ring. "Real diamonds?"
Aringarosa looked at the ring. "I could not possibly part with this."
The pilot shrugged, turning and focusing back out the windshield.
Aringarosa felt a deepening sadness. He looked at the ring. Everything it represented was about to be lost to the bishop anyway. After a long moment, he slid the ring from his finger and placed it gently on the instrument panel.
Aringarosa slunk out of the cockpit and sat back down. Fifteen seconds later, he could feel the pilot banking a few more degrees to the north.
Even so, Aringarosa's moment of glory was in shambles.
It had all begun as a holy cause. A brilliantly crafted scheme. Now, like a house of cards, it was collapsing in on itself... and the end was nowhere in sight.

CHAPTER 76
Langdon could see Sophie was still shaken from recounting her experience of Hieros Gamos. For his part, Langdon was amazed to have heard it. Not only had Sophie witnessed the full-blown ritual, but her own grandfather had been the celebrant... the Grand Master of the Priory of Sion. It was heady company. Da Vinci, Botticelli, Isaac Newton, Victor Hugo, Jean Cocteau... Jacques Saunière.
"I don't know what else I can tell you," Langdon said softly.
Sophie's eyes were a deep green now, tearful. "He raised me like his own daughter."
Langdon now recognized the emotion that had been growing in her eyes as they spoke. It was remorse. Distant and deep. Sophie Neveu had shunned her grandfather and was now seeing him in an entirely different light.
Outside, the dawn was coming fast, its crimson aura gathering off the starboard. The earth was still black beneath them.
"Victuals, my dears?" Teabing rejoined them with a flourish, presenting several cans of Coke and a box of old crackers. He apologized profusely for the limited fare as he doled out the goods. "Our friend the monk isn't talking yet," he chimed, "but give him time." He bit into a cracker and eyed the poem. "So, my lovely, any headway?" He looked at Sophie. "What is your grandfather trying to tell us here? Where the devil is this headstone? This headstone praised by Templars."
Sophie shook her head and remained silent.
While Teabing again dug into the verse, Langdon popped a Coke and turned to the window, his thoughts awash with images of secret rituals and unbroken codes. A headstone praised by Templars is the key. He took a long sip from the can. A headstone praised by Templars. The cola was warm.
The dissolving veil of night seemed to evaporate quickly, and as Langdon watched the transformation, he saw a shimmering ocean stretch out beneath them. The English Channel. It wouldn't be long now.
Langdon willed the light of day to bring with it a second kind of illumination, but the lighter it became outside, the further he felt from the truth. He heard the rhythms of iambic pentameter and chanting, Hieros Gamos and sacred rites, resonating with the rumble of the jet.
A headstone praised by Templars.

The plane was over land again when a flash of enlightenment struck him. Langdon set down his empty can of Coke hard. "You won't believe this," he said, turning to the others. "The Templar headstone—I figured it out."
Teabing's eyes turned to saucers. "You know where the headstone is?"
Langdon smiled. "Not where it is. What it is."
Sophie leaned in to hear.
"I think the headstone references a literal stone head," Langdon explained, savoring the familiar excitement of academic breakthrough. "Not a grave marker."
"A stone head?" Teabing demanded.
Sophie looked equally confused.
"Leigh," Langdon said, turning, "during the Inquisition, the Church accused the Knights Templar of all kinds of heresies, right?"
"Correct. They fabricated all kinds of charges. Sodomy, urination on the cross, devil worship, quite a list."
"And on that list was the worship of false idols, right? Specifically, the Church accused the Templars of secretly performing rituals in which they prayed to a carved stone head... the pagan god—"
"Baphomet!" Teabing blurted. "My heavens, Robert, you're right! A headstone praised by Templars!"
Langdon quickly explained to Sophie that Baphomet was a pagan fertility god associated with the creative force of reproduction. Baphomet's head was represented as that of a ram or goat, a common symbol of procreation and fecundity. The Templars honored Baphomet by encircling a stone replica of his head and chanting prayers.
"Baphomet," Teabing tittered. "The ceremony honored the creative magic of sexual union, but Pope Clement convinced everyone that Baphomet's head was in fact that of the devil. The Pope used the head of Baphomet as the linchpin in his case against the Templars."
Langdon concurred. The modern belief in a horned devil known as Satan could be traced back to Baphomet and the Church's attempts to recast the horned fertility god as a symbol of evil. The Church had obviously succeeded, although not entirely. Traditional American Thanksgiving tables 

still bore pagan, horned fertility symbols. The cornucopia or "horn of plenty" was a tribute to Baphomet's fertility and dated back to Zeus being suckled by a goat whose horn broke off and magically filled with fruit. Baphomet also appeared in group photographs when some joker raised two fingers behind a friend's head in the V-symbol of horns; certainly few of the pranksters realized their mocking gesture was in fact advertising their victim's robust sperm count.
"Yes, yes," Teabing was saying excitedly. "Baphomet must be what the poem is referring to. A headstone praised by Templars."
"Okay," Sophie said, "but if Baphomet is the headstone praised by Templars, then we have a new dilemma." She pointed to the dials on the cryptex. "Baphomet has eight letters. We only have room for five."
Teabing grinned broadly. "My dear, this is where the Atbash Cipher comes into play" 
CHAPTER 77
Langdon was impressed. Teabing had just finished writing out the entire twenty-two-letter Hebrew alphabet—alef-beit—from memory. Granted, he'd used Roman equivalents rather than Hebrew characters, but even so, he was now reading through them with flawless pronunciation.
Teabing dramatically mopped his brow and plowed on. "In formal Hebrew spelling, the vowel sounds are not written. Therefore, when we write the word Baphomet using the Hebrew alphabet, it will lose its three vowels in translation, leaving us—"
"Five letters," Sophie blurted.
Teabing nodded and began writing again. "Okay, here is the proper spelling of Baphomet in Hebrew letters. I'll sketch in the missing vowels for clarity's sake.

"Remember, of course," he added, "that Hebrew is normally written in the opposite direction, but we can just as easily use Atbash this way. Next, all we have to do is create our substitution scheme by rewriting the entire alphabet in reverse order opposite the original alphabet."
"There's an easier way," Sophie said, taking the pen from Teabing. "It works for all reflectional 

substitution ciphers, including the Atbash. A little trick I learned at the Royal Holloway." Sophie wrote the first half of the alphabet from left to right, and then, beneath it, wrote the second half, right to left. "Cryptanalysts call it the fold-over. Half as complicated. Twice as clean."

EOS

MOCKINGJAY

PART I
"THE ASHES"
1
I stare down at my shoes, watching as a fine layer of
ash settles on the worn leather. This is where the bed I
shared with my sister, Prim, stood. Over there was the
kitchen table. The bricks of the chimney, which collapsed in
a charred heap, provide a point of reference for the rest of
the house. How else could I orient myself in this sea of
gray?
Almost nothing remains of District 12. A month ago,
the Capitol's firebombs obliterated the poor coal miners'
houses in the Seam, the shops in the town, even the Justice
Building. The only area that escaped incineration was the
Victor's Village. I don't know why exactly. Perhaps so
anyone forced to come here on Capitol business would
have somewhere decent to stay. The odd reporter. A
committee assessing the condition of the coal mines. A
squad of Peacekeepers checking for returning refugees.
But no one is returning except me. And that's only for a
brief visit. The authorities in District 13 were against my
coming back. They viewed it as a costly and pointless
venture, given that at least a dozen invisible hovercraft are
circling overhead for my protection and there's no
intelligence to be gained. I had to see it, though. So much
so that I made it a condition of my cooperating with any of
their plans.
Finally, Plutarch Heavensbee, the Head Gamemaker
who had organized the rebels in the Capitol, threw up his
hands. "Let her go. Better to waste a day than another
month. Maybe a little tour of Twelve is just what she needs
to convince her we're on the same side."
The same side. A pain stabs my left temple and I
press my hand against it. Right on the spot where Johanna
Mason hit me with the coil of wire. The memories swirl as I
try to sort out what is true and what is false. What series of
events led me to be standing in the ruins of my city? This is
hard because the effects of the concussion she gave me
haven't completely subsided and my thoughts still have a
tendency to jumble together. Also, the drugs they use to
control my pain and mood sometimes make me see things.
I guess. I'm still not entirely convinced that I was
hallucinating the night the floor of my hospital room
transformed into a carpet of writhing snakes.
I use a technique one of the doctors suggested. I start
with the simplest things I know to be true and work toward
the more complicated. The list begins to roll in my head....
My name is Katniss Everdeen. I am seventeen years
old. My home is District 12. I was in the Hunger Games. I
escaped. The Capitol hates me. Peeta was taken
prisoner. He is thought to be dead. Most likely he is dead.
It is probably best if he is dead....
"Katniss. Should I come down?" My best friend Gale's
voice reaches me through the headset the rebels insisted I
wear. He's up in a hovercraft, watching me carefully, ready
to swoop in if anything goes amiss. I realize I'm crouched
down now, elbows on my thighs, my head braced between
my hands. I must look on the verge of some kind of
breakdown. This won't do. Not when they're finally weaning
me off the medication.
I straighten up and wave his offer away. "No. I'm fine."
To reinforce this, I begin to move away from my old house
and in toward the town. Gale asked to be dropped off in 12
with me, but he didn't force the issue when I refused his
company. He understands I don't want anyone with me
today. Not even him. Some walks you have to take alone.
The summer's been scorching hot and dry as a bone.
There's been next to no rain to disturb the piles of ash left
by the attack. They shift here and there, in reaction to my
footsteps. No breeze to scatter them. I keep my eyes on
what I remember as the road, because when I first landed in
the Meadow, I wasn't careful and I walked right into a rock.
Only it wasn't a rock--it was someone's skull. It rolled over
and over and landed faceup, and for a long time I couldn't
stop looking at the teeth, wondering whose they were,
thinking of how mine would probably look the same way
under similar circumstances.
I stick to the road out of habit, but it's a bad choice,
because it's full of the remains of those who tried to flee.
Some were incinerated entirely. But others, probably
overcome with smoke, escaped the worst of the flames and
now lie reeking in various states of decomposition, carrion
for scavengers, blanketed by flies. I killed you, I think as I
pass a pile. And you. And you.
Because I did. It was my arrow, aimed at the chink in
the force field surrounding the arena, that brought on this
firestorm of retribution. That sent the whole country of
Panem into chaos.
In my head I hear President Snow's words, spoken the
morning I was to begin the Victory Tour. "Katniss
Everdeen, the girl who was on fire, you have provided a
spark that, left unattended, may grow to an inferno that
destroys Panem." It turns out he wasn't exaggerating or
simply trying to scare me. He was, perhaps, genuinely
attempting to enlist my help. But I had already set
something in motion that I had no ability to control.
Burning. Still burning, I think numbly. The fires at the
coal mines belch black smoke in the distance. There's no
one left to care, though. More than ninety percent of the
district's population is dead. The remaining eight hundred
or so are refugees in District 13--which, as far as I'm
concerned, is the same thing as being homeless forever.
I know I shouldn't think that; I know I should be grateful
for the way we have been welcomed. Sick, wounded,
starving, and empty-handed. Still, I can never get around
the fact that District 13 was instrumental in 12's destruction.
This doesn't absolve me of blame--there's plenty of blame
to go around. But without them, I would not have been part
of a larger plot to overthrow the Capitol or had the
wherewithal to do it.
The citizens of District 12 had no organized resistance
movement of their own. No say in any of this. They only had
the misfortune to have me. Some survivors think it's good
luck, though, to be free of District 12 at last. To have
escaped the endless hunger and oppression, the perilous
mines, the lash of our final Head Peacekeeper, Romulus
Thread. To have a new home at all is seen as a wonder
since, up until a short time ago, we hadn't even known that
District 13 still existed.
The credit for the survivors' escape has landed
squarely on Gale's shoulders, although he's loath to accept
it. As soon as the Quarter Quell was over--as soon as I had
been lifted from the arena--the electricity in District 12 was
cut, the televisions went black, and the Seam became so
silent, people could hear one another's heartbeats. No one
did anything to protest or celebrate what had happened in
the arena. Yet within fifteen minutes, the sky was filled with
hoverplanes and the bombs were raining down.
It was Gale who thought of the Meadow, one of the few
places not filled with old wooden homes embedded with
coal dust. He herded those he could in its direction,
including my mother and Prim. He formed the team that
pulled down the fence--now just a harmless chain-link
barrier, with the electricity off--and led the people into the
woods. He took them to the only place he could think of, the
lake my father had shown me as a child. And it was from
there they watched the distant flames eat up everything they
knew in the world.
By dawn the bombers were long gone, the fires dying,
the final stragglers rounded up. My mother and Prim had
set up a medical area for the injured and were attempting
to treat them with whatever they could glean from the
woods. Gale had two sets of bows and arrows, one hunting
knife, one fishing net, and over eight hundred terrified
people to feed. With the help of those who were ablebodied,
they managed for three days. And that's when the
hovercraft unexpectedly arrived to evacuate them to District
13, where there were more than enough clean, white living
compartments, plenty of clothing, and three meals a day.
The compartments had the disadvantage of being
underground, the clothing was identical, and the food was
relatively tasteless, but for the refugees of 12, these were
minor considerations. They were safe. They were being
cared for. They were alive and eagerly welcomed.
This enthusiasm was interpreted as kindness. But a
man named Dalton, a District 10 refugee who'd made it to
13 on foot a few years ago, leaked the real motive to me.
"They need you. Me. They need us all. Awhile back, there
was some sort of pox epidemic that killed a bunch of them
and left a lot more infertile. New breeding stock. That's how
they see us." Back in 10, he'd worked on one of the beef
ranches, maintaining the genetic diversity of the herd with
the implantation of long-frozen cow embryos. He's very
likely right about 13, because there don't seem to be nearly
enough kids around. But so what? We're not being kept in
pens, we're being trained for work, the children are being
educated. Those over fourteen have been given entry-level
ranks in the military and are addressed respectfully as
"Soldier." Every single refugee was granted automatic
citizenship by the authorities of 13.
Still, I hate them. But, of course, I hate almost
everybody now. Myself more than anyone.
The surface beneath my feet hardens, and under the
carpet of ash, I feel the paving stones of the square. Around
the perimeter is a shallow border of refuse where the shops
stood. A heap of blackened rubble has replaced the
Justice Building. I walk to the approximate site of the
bakery Peeta's family owned. Nothing much left but the
melted lump of the oven. Peeta's parents, his two older
brothers--none of them made it to 13. Fewer than a dozen
of what passed for District 12's well-to-do escaped the fire.
Peeta would have nothing to come home to, anyway.
Except me...
I back away from the bakery and bump into something,
lose my balance, and find myself sitting on a hunk of sunheated
metal. I puzzle over what it might have been, then
remember Thread's recent renovations of the square.
Stocks, whipping posts, and this, the remains of the
gallows. Bad. This is bad. It brings on the flood of images
that torments me, awake or asleep. Peeta being tortured--
drowned, burned, lacerated, shocked, maimed, beaten--as
the Capitol tries to get information about the rebellion that
he doesn't know. I squeeze my eyes shut and try to reach
for him across the hundreds and hundreds of miles, to send
my thoughts into his mind, to let him know he is not alone.
But he is. And I can't help him.
Running. Away from the square and to the one place
the fire did not destroy. I pass the wreckage of the mayor's
house, where my friend Madge lived. No word of her or her
family. Were they evacuated to the Capitol because of her
father's position, or left to the flames? Ashes billow up
around me, and I pull the hem of my shirt up over my mouth.
It's not wondering what I breathe in, but who, that threatens
to choke me.
The grass has been scorched and the gray snow fell
here as well, but the twelve fine houses of the Victor's
Village are unscathed. I bolt into the house I lived in for the
past year, slam the door closed, and lean back against it.
The place seems untouched. Clean. Eerily quiet. Why did I
come back to 12? How can this visit help me answer the
question I can't escape?
"What am I going to do?" I whisper to the walls.
Because I really don't know.
People keep talking at me, talking, talking, talking.
Plutarch Heavensbee. His calculating assistant, Fulvia
Cardew. A mishmash of district leaders. Military officials.
But not Alma Coin, the president of 13, who just watches.
She's fifty or so, with gray hair that falls in an unbroken
sheet to her shoulders. I'm somewhat fascinated by her
hair, since it's so uniform, so without a flaw, a wisp, even a
split end. Her eyes are gray, but not like those of people
from the Seam. They're very pale, as if almost all the color
has been sucked out of them. The color of slush that you
wish would melt away.
What they want is for me to truly take on the role they
designed for me. The symbol of the revolution. The
Mockingjay. It isn't enough, what I've done in the past,
defying the Capitol in the Games, providing a rallying point.
I must now become the actual leader, the face, the voice,
the embodiment of the revolution. The person who the
districts--most of which are now openly at war with the
Capitol--can count on to blaze the path to victory. I won't
have to do it alone. They have a whole team of people to
make me over, dress me, write my speeches, orchestrate
my appearances--as if that doesn't sound horribly familiar--
and all I have to do is play my part. Sometimes I listen to
them and sometimes I just watch the perfect line of Coin's
hair and try to decide if it's a wig. Eventually, I leave the
room because my head starts to ache or it's time to eat or if
I don't get aboveground I might start screaming. I don't
bother to say anything. I simply get up and walk out.
Yesterday afternoon, as the door was closing behind
me, I heard Coin say, "I told you we should have rescued
the boy first." Meaning Peeta. I couldn't agree more. He
would've been an excellent mouthpiece.
And who did they fish out of the arena instead? Me,
who won't cooperate. Beetee, an older inventor from 3, who
I rarely see because he was pulled into weapons
development the minute he could sit upright. Literally, they
wheeled his hospital bed into some top secret area and
now he only occasionally shows up for meals. He's very
smart and very willing to help the cause, but not really
firebrand material. Then there's Finnick Odair, the sex
symbol from the fishing district, who kept Peeta alive in the
arena when I couldn't. They want to transform Finnick into a
rebel leader as well, but first they'll have to get him to stay
awake for more than five minutes. Even when he is
conscious, you have to say everything to him three times to
get through to his brain. The doctors say it's from the
electrical shock he received in the arena, but I know it's a
lot more complicated than that. I know that Finnick can't
focus on anything in 13 because he's trying so hard to see
what's happening in the Capitol to Annie, the mad girl from
his district who's the only person on earth he loves.
Despite serious reservations, I had to forgive Finnick
for his role in the conspiracy that landed me here. He, at
least, has some idea of what I'm going through. And it takes
too much energy to stay angry with someone who cries so
much.
I move through the downstairs on hunter's feet,
reluctant to make any sound. I pick up a few
remembrances: a photo of my parents on their wedding
day, a blue hair ribbon for Prim, the family book of
medicinal and edible plants. The book falls open to a page
with yellow flowers and I shut it quickly because it was
Peeta's brush that painted them.
What am I going to do?
Is there any point in doing anything at all? My mother,
my sister, and Gale's family are finally safe. As for the rest
of 12, people are either dead, which is irreversible, or
protected in 13. That leaves the rebels in the districts. Of
course, I hate the Capitol, but I have no confidence that my
being the Mockingjay will benefit those who are trying to
bring it down. How can I help the districts when every time I
make a move, it results in suffering and loss of life? The old
man shot in District 11 for whistling. The crackdown in 12
after I intervened in Gale's whipping. My stylist, Cinna,
being dragged, bloody and unconscious, from the Launch
Room before the Games. Plutarch's sources believe he
was killed during interrogation. Brilliant, enigmatic, lovely
Cinna is dead because of me. I push the thought away
because it's too impossibly painful to dwell on without
losing my fragile hold on the situation entirely.
What am I going to do?
To become the Mockingjay...could any good I do
possibly outweigh the damage? Who can I trust to answer
that question? Certainly not that crew in 13. I swear, now
that my family and Gale's are out of harm's way, I could run
away. Except for one unfinished piece of business. Peeta.
If I knew for sure that he was dead, I could just disappear
into the woods and never look back. But until I do, I'm stuck.
I spin on my heel at the sound of a hiss. In the kitchen
doorway, back arched, ears flattened, stands the ugliest
tomcat in the world. "Buttercup," I say. Thousands of people
are dead, but he has survived and even looks well fed. On
what? He can get in and out of the house through a window
we always left ajar in the pantry. He must have been eating
field mice. I refuse to consider the alternative.
I squat down and extend a hand. "Come here, boy."
Not likely. He's angry at his abandonment. Besides, I'm not
offering food, and my ability to provide scraps has always
been my main redeeming quality to him. For a while, when
we used to meet up at the old house because we both
disliked this new one, we seemed to be bonding a little.
That's clearly over. He blinks those unpleasant yellow eyes.
"Want to see Prim?" I ask. Her name catches his
attention. Besides his own, it's the only word that means
anything to him. He gives a rusty meow and approaches
me. I pick him up, stroking his fur, then go to the closet and
dig out my game bag and unceremoniously stuff him in.
There's no other way I'll be able to carry him on the
hovercraft, and he means the world to my sister. Her goat,
Lady, an animal of actual value, has unfortunately not made
an appearance.
In my headset, I hear Gale's voice telling me we must
go back. But the game bag has reminded me of one more
thing that I want. I sling the strap of the bag over the back of
a chair and dash up the steps to my bedroom. Inside the
closet hangs my father's hunting jacket. Before the Quell, I
brought it here from the old house, thinking its presence
might be of comfort to my mother and sister when I was
dead. Thank goodness, or it'd be ash now.
The soft leather feels soothing and for a moment I'm
calmed by the memories of the hours spent wrapped in it.
Then, inexplicably, my palms begin to sweat. A strange
sensation creeps up the back of my neck. I whip around to
face the room and find it empty. Tidy. Everything in its
place. There was no sound to alarm me. What, then?
My nose twitches. It's the smell. Cloying and artificial. A
dab of white peeks out of a vase of dried flowers on my
dresser. I approach it with cautious steps. There, all but
obscured by its preserved cousins, is a fresh white rose.
Perfect. Down to the last thorn and silken petal.
And I know immediately who's sent it to me.
President Snow.
When I begin to gag at the stench, I back away and
clear out. How long has it been here? A day? An hour? The
rebels did a security sweep of the Victor's Village before I
was cleared to come here, checking for explosives, bugs,
anything unusual. But perhaps the rose didn't seem
noteworthy to them. Only to me.
Downstairs, I snag the game bag off the chair,
bouncing it along the floor until I remember it's occupied.
On the lawn, I frantically signal to the hovercraft while
Buttercup thrashes. I jab him with my elbow, but this only
infuriates him. A hovercraft materializes and a ladder drops
down. I step on and the current freezes me until I'm lifted on
board.
Gale helps me from the ladder. "You all right?"
"Yeah," I say, wiping the sweat off my face with my
sleeve.
He left me a rose! I want to scream, but it's not
information I'm sure I should share with someone like
Plutarch looking on. First of all, because it will make me
sound crazy. Like I either imagined it, which is quite
possible, or I'm overreacting, which will buy me a trip back
to the drug-induced dreamland I'm trying so hard to escape.
No one will fully understand--how it's not just a flower, not
even just President Snow's flower, but a promise of
revenge--because no one else sat in the study with him
when he threatened me before the Victory Tour.
Positioned on my dresser, that white-as-snow rose is
a personal message to me. It speaks of unfinished
business. It whispers, I can find you. I can reach you.
Perhaps I am watching you now.
2
Are there Capitol hoverplanes speeding in to blow us
out of the sky? As we travel over District 12, I watch
anxiously for signs of an attack, but nothing pursues us.
After several minutes, when I hear an exchange between
Plutarch and the pilot confirming that the airspace is clear, I
begin to relax a little.
Gale nods at the howls coming from my game bag.
"Now I know why you had to go back."
"If there was even a chance of his recovery." I dump
the bag onto a seat, where the loathsome creature begins
a low, deep-throated growl. "Oh, shut up," I tell the bag as I
sink into the cushioned window seat across from it.
Gale sits next to me. "Pretty bad down there?"
"Couldn't be much worse," I answer. I look in his eyes
and see my own grief reflected there. Our hands find each
other, holding fast to a part of 12 that Snow has somehow
failed to destroy. We sit in silence for the rest of the trip to
13, which only takes about forty-five minutes. A mere
week's journey on foot. Bonnie and Twill, the District 8
refugees who I encountered in the woods last winter,
weren't so far from their destination after all. They
apparently didn't make it, though. When I asked about them
in 13, no one seemed to know who I was talking about.
Died in the woods, I guess.
From the air, 13 looks about as cheerful as 12. The
rubble isn't smoking, the way the Capitol shows it on
television, but there's next to no life aboveground. In the
seventy-five years since the Dark Days--when 13 was said
to have been obliterated in the war between the Capitol
and the districts--almost all new construction has been
beneath the earth's surface. There was already a
substantial underground facility here, developed over
centuries to be either a clandestine refuge for government
leaders in time of war or a last resort for humanity if life
above became unlivable. Most important for the people of
13, it was the center of the Capitol's nuclear weapons
development program. During the Dark Days, the rebels in
13 wrested control from the government forces, trained
their nuclear missiles on the Capitol, and then struck a
bargain: They would play dead in exchange for being left
alone. The Capitol had another nuclear arsenal out west,
but it couldn't attack 13 without certain retaliation. It was
forced to accept 13's deal. The Capitol demolished the
visible remains of the district and cut off all access from the
outside. Perhaps the Capitol's leaders thought that, without
help, 13 would die off on its own. It almost did a few times,
but it always managed to pull through due to strict sharing
of resources, strenuous discipline, and constant vigilance
against any further attacks from the Capitol.
Now the citizens live almost exclusively underground.
You can go outside for exercise and sunlight but only at very
specific times in your schedule. You can't miss your
schedule. Every morning, you're supposed to stick your
right arm in this contraption in the wall. It tattoos the smooth
inside of your forearm with your schedule for the day in a
sickly purple ink. 7:00--Breakfast. 7:30--Kitchen Duties.
8:30--Education Center, Room 17. And so on. The ink is
indelible until 22:00--Bathing. That's when whatever keeps
it water resistant breaks down and the whole schedule
rinses away. The lights-out at 22:30 signals that everyone
not on the night shift should be in bed.
At first, when I was so ill in the hospital, I could forgo
being imprinted. But once I moved into Compartment 307
with my mother and sister, I was expected to get with the
program. Except for showing up for meals, though, I pretty
much ignore the words on my arm. I just go back to our
compartment or wander around 13 or fall asleep
somewhere hidden. An abandoned air duct. Behind the
water pipes in the laundry. There's a closet in the Education
Center that's great because no one ever seems to need
school supplies. They're so frugal with things here, waste is
practically a criminal activity. Fortunately, the people of 12
have never been wasteful. But once I saw Fulvia Cardew
crumple up a sheet of paper with just a couple of words
written on it and you would've thought she'd murdered
someone from the looks she got. Her face turned tomato
red, making the silver flowers inlaid in her plump cheeks
even more noticeable. The very portrait of excess. One of
my few pleasures in 13 is watching the handful of
pampered Capitol "rebels" squirming as they try to fit in.
I don't know how long I'll be able to get away with my
complete disregard for the clockwork precision of
attendance required by my hosts. Right now, they leave me
alone because I'm classified as mentally disoriented--it
says so right on my plastic medical bracelet--and everyone
has to tolerate my ramblings. But that can't last forever.
Neither can their patience with the Mockingjay issue.
From the landing pad, Gale and I walk down a series
of stairways to Compartment 307. We could take the
elevator, only it reminds me too much of the one that lifted
me into the arena. I'm having a hard time adjusting to being
underground so much. But after the surreal encounter with
the rose, for the first time the descent makes me feel safer.
I hesitate at the door marked 307, anticipating the
questions from my family. "What am I going to tell them
about Twelve?" I ask Gale.
"I doubt they'll ask for details. They saw it burn. They'll
mostly be worried about how you're handling it." Gale
touches my cheek. "Like I am."
I press my face against his hand for a moment. "I'll
survive."
Then I take a deep breath and open the door. My
mother and sister are home for 18:00--Reflection, a half
hour of downtime before dinner. I see the concern on their
faces as they try to gauge my emotional state. Before
anyone can ask anything, I empty my game bag and it
becomes 18:00--Cat Adoration. Prim just sits on the floor
weeping and rocking that awful Buttercup, who interrupts
his purring only for an occasional hiss at me. He gives me a
particularly smug look when she ties the blue ribbon around
his neck.
My mother hugs the wedding photo tightly against her
chest and then places it, along with the book of plants, on
our government-issued chest of drawers. I hang my father's
jacket on the back of a chair. For a moment, the place
almost seems like home. So I guess the trip to 12 wasn't a
complete waste.
We're heading down to the dining hall for 18:30--
Dinner when Gale's communicuff begins to beep. It looks
like an oversized watch, but it receives print messages.
Being granted a communicuff is a special privilege that's
reserved for those important to the cause, a status Gale
achieved by his rescue of the citizens of 12. "They need the
two of us in Command," he says.
Trailing a few steps behind Gale, I try to collect myself
before I'm thrown into what's sure to be another relentless
Mockingjay session. I linger in the doorway of Command,
the high-tech meeting/war council room complete with
computerized talking walls, electronic maps showing the
troop movements in various districts, and a giant
rectangular table with control panels I'm not supposed to
touch. No one notices me, though, because they're all
gathered at a television screen at the far end of the room
that airs the Capitol broadcast around the clock. I'm
thinking I might be able to slip away when Plutarch, whose
ample frame has been blocking the television, catches
sight of me and waves urgently for me to join them. I
reluctantly move forward, trying to imagine how it could be
of interest to me. It's always the same. War footage.
Propaganda. Replaying the bombings of District 12. An
ominous message from President Snow. So it's almost
entertaining to see Caesar Flickerman, the eternal host of
the Hunger Games, with his painted face and sparkly suit,
preparing to give an interview. Until the camera pulls back
and I see that his guest is Peeta.
A sound escapes me. The same combination of gasp
and groan that comes from being submerged in water,
deprived of oxygen to the point of pain. I push people aside
until I am right in front of him, my hand resting on the screen.
I search his eyes for any sign of hurt, any reflection of the
agony of torture. There is nothing. Peeta looks healthy to
the point of robustness. His skin is glowing, flawless, in that
full-body-polish way. His manner's composed, serious. I
can't reconcile this image with the battered, bleeding boy
who haunts my dreams.
Caesar settles himself more comfortably in the chair
across from Peeta and gives him a long look.
"So...Peeta...welcome back."
Peeta smiles slightly. "I bet you thought you'd done
your last interview with me, Caesar."
"I confess, I did," says Caesar. "The night before the
Quarter Quell...well, who ever thought we'd see you again?"
"It wasn't part of my plan, that's for sure," says Peeta
with a frown.
Caesar leans in to him a little. "I think it was clear to all
of us what your plan was. To sacrifice yourself in the arena
so that Katniss Everdeen and your child could survive."
"That was it. Clear and simple." Peeta's fingers trace
the upholstered pattern on the arm of the chair. "But other
people had plans as well."
Yes, other people had plans, I think. Has Peeta
guessed, then, how the rebels used us as pawns? How my
rescue was arranged from the beginning? And finally, how
our mentor, Haymitch Abernathy, betrayed us both for a
cause he pretended to have no interest in?
In the silence that follows, I notice the lines that have
formed between Peeta's eyebrows. He has guessed or he
has been told. But the Capitol has not killed or even
punished him. For right now, that exceeds my wildest
hopes. I drink in his wholeness, the soundness of his body
and mind. It runs through me like the morphling they give
me in the hospital, dulling the pain of the last weeks.
"Why don't you tell us about that last night in the
arena?" suggests Caesar. "Help us sort a few things out."
Peeta nods but takes his time speaking. "That last
night...to tell you about that last night...well, first of all, you
have to imagine how it felt in the arena. It was like being an
insect trapped under a bowl filled with steaming air. And all
around you, jungle...green and alive and ticking. That giant
clock ticking away your life. Every hour promising some
new horror. You have to imagine that in the past two days,
sixteen people have died--some of them defending you. At
the rate things are going, the last eight will be dead by
morning. Save one. The victor. And your plan is that it won't
be you."
My body breaks out in a sweat at the memory. My
hand slides down the screen and hangs limply at my side.
Peeta doesn't need a brush to paint images from the
Games. He works just as well in words.
"Once you're in the arena, the rest of the world
becomes very distant," he continues. "All the people and
things you loved or cared about almost cease to exist. The
pink sky and the monsters in the jungle and the tributes who
want your blood become your final reality, the only one that
ever mattered. As bad as it makes you feel, you're going to
have to do some killing, because in the arena, you only get
one wish. And it's very costly."
"It costs your life," says Caesar.
"Oh, no. It costs a lot more than your life. To murder
innocent people?" says Peeta. "It costs everything you are."
"Everything you are," repeats Caesar quietly.
A hush has fallen over the room, and I can feel it
spreading across Panem. A nation leaning in toward its
screens. Because no one has ever talked about what it's
really like in the arena before.
Peeta goes on. "So you hold on to your wish. And that
last night, yes, my wish was to save Katniss. But even
without knowing about the rebels, it didn't feel right.
Everything was too complicated. I found myself regretting I
hadn't run off with her earlier in the day, as she had
suggested. But there was no getting out of it at that point."
"You were too caught up in Beetee's plan to electrify
the salt lake," says Caesar.
"Too busy playing allies with the others. I should have
never let them separate us!" Peeta bursts out. "That's when
I lost her."
"When you stayed at the lightning tree, and she and
Johanna Mason took the coil of wire down to the water,"
Caesar clarifies.
"I didn't want to!" Peeta flushes in agitation. "But I
couldn't argue with Beetee without indicating we were
about to break away from the alliance. When that wire was
cut, everything just went insane. I can only remember bits
and pieces. Trying to find her. Watching Brutus kill Chaff.
Killing Brutus myself. I know she was calling my name. Then
the lightning bolt hit the tree, and the force field around the
arena...blew out."
"Katniss blew it out, Peeta," says Caesar. "You've
seen the footage."
"She didn't know what she was doing. None of us
could follow Beetee's plan. You can see her trying to figure
out what to do with that wire," Peeta snaps back.
"All right. It just looks suspicious," says Caesar. "As if
she was part of the rebels' plan all along."
Peeta's on his feet, leaning in to Caesar's face, hands
locked on the arms of his interviewer's chair. "Really? And
was it part of her plan for Johanna to nearly kill her? For that
electric shock to paralyze her? To trigger the bombing?"
He's yelling now. "She didn't know, Caesar! Neither of us
knew anything except that we were trying to keep each
other alive!"
Caesar places his hand on Peeta's chest in a gesture
that's both self-protective and conciliatory. "Okay, Peeta, I
believe you."
"Okay." Peeta withdraws from Caesar, pulling back his
hands, running them through his hair, mussing his carefully
styled blond curls. He slumps back in his chair, distraught.
Caesar waits a moment, studying Peeta. "What about
your mentor, Haymitch Abernathy?"
Peeta's face hardens. "I don't know what Haymitch
knew."
"Could he have been part of the conspiracy?" asks
Caesar.
"He never mentioned it," says Peeta.
Caesar presses on. "What does your heart tell you?"
"That I shouldn't have trusted him," says Peeta. "That's
all."
I haven't seen Haymitch since I attacked him on the
hovercraft, leaving long claw marks down his face. I know
it's been bad for him here. District 13 strictly forbids any
production or consumption of intoxicating beverages, and
even the rubbing alcohol in the hospital is kept under lock
and key. Finally, Haymitch is being forced into sobriety, with
no secret stashes or home-brewed concoctions to ease his
transition. They've got him in seclusion until he's dried out,
as he's not deemed fit for public display. It must be
excruciating, but I lost all my sympathy for Haymitch when I
realized how he had deceived us. I hope he's watching the
Capitol broadcast now, so he can see that Peeta has cast
him off as well.
Caesar pats Peeta's shoulder. "We can stop now if
you want."
"Was there more to discuss?" says Peeta wryly.
"I was going to ask your thoughts on the war, but if
you're too upset..." begins Caesar.
"Oh, I'm not too upset to answer that." Peeta takes a
deep breath and then looks straight into the camera. "I want
everyone watching--whether you're on the Capitol or the
rebel side--to stop for just a moment and think about what
this war could mean. For human beings. We almost went
extinct fighting one another before. Now our numbers are
even fewer. Our conditions more tenuous. Is this really what
we want to do? Kill ourselves off completely? In the hopes
that--what? Some decent species will inherit the smoking
remains of the earth?"
"I don't really...I'm not sure I'm following..." says
Caesar.
"We can't fight one another, Caesar," Peeta explains.
"There won't be enough of us left to keep going. If
everybody doesn't lay down their weapons--and I mean, as
in very soon--it's all over, anyway."
"So...you're calling for a cease-fire?" Caesar asks.
"Yes. I'm calling for a cease-fire," says Peeta tiredly.
"Now why don't we ask the guards to take me back to my
quarters so I can build another hundred card houses?"
Caesar turns to the camera. "All right. I think that wraps
it up. So back to our regularly scheduled programming."
Music plays them out, and then there's a woman
reading a list of expected shortages in the Capitol--fresh
fruit, solar batteries, soap. I watch her with uncharacteristic
absorption, because I know everyone will be waiting for my
reaction to the interview. But there's no way I can process it
all so quickly--the joy of seeing Peeta alive and unharmed,
his defense of my innocence in collaborating with the
rebels, and his undeniable complicity with the Capitol now
that he's called for a cease-fire. Oh, he made it sound as if
he were condemning both sides in the war. But at this point,
with only minor victories for the rebels, a cease-fire could
only result in a return to our previous status. Or worse.
Behind me, I can hear the accusations against Peeta
building. The words traitor, liar, and enemy bounce off the
walls. Since I can neither join in the rebels' outrage nor
counter it, I decide the best thing to do is clear out. As I
reach the door, Coin's voice rises above the others. "You
have not been dismissed, Soldier Everdeen."
One of Coin's men lays a hand on my arm. It's not an
aggressive move, really, but after the arena, I react
defensively to any unfamiliar touch. I jerk my arm free and
take off running down the halls. Behind me, there's the
sound of a scuffle, but I don't stop. My mind does a quick
inventory of my odd little hiding places, and I wind up in the
supply closet, curled up against a crate of chalk.
"You're alive," I whisper, pressing my palms against
my cheeks, feeling the smile that's so wide it must look like
a grimace. Peeta's alive. And a traitor. But at the moment, I
don't care. Not what he says, or who he says it for, only that
he is still capable of speech.
After a while, the door opens and someone slips in.
Gale slides down beside me, his nose trickling blood.
"What happened?" I ask.
"I got in Boggs's way," he answers with a shrug. I use
my sleeve to wipe his nose. "Watch it!"
I try to be gentler. Patting, not wiping. "Which one is
he?"
"Oh, you know. Coin's right-hand lackey. The one who
tried to stop you." He pushes my hand away. "Quit! You'll
bleed me to death."
The trickle has turned to a steady stream. I give up on
the first-aid attempts. "You fought with Boggs?"
"No, just blocked the doorway when he tried to follow
you. His elbow caught me in the nose," says Gale.
"They'll probably punish you," I say.
"Already have." He holds up his wrist. I stare at it
uncomprehendingly. "Coin took back my communicuff."
I bite my lip, trying to remain serious. But it seems so
ridiculous. "I'm sorry, Soldier Gale Hawthorne."
"Don't be, Soldier Katniss Everdeen." He grins. "I felt
like a jerk walking around with it anyway." We both start
laughing. "I think it was quite a demotion."
This is one of the few good things about 13. Getting
Gale back. With the pressure of the Capitol's arranged
marriage between Peeta and me gone, we've managed to
regain our friendship. He doesn't push it any further--try to
kiss me or talk about love. Either I've been too sick, or he's
willing to give me space, or he knows it's just too cruel with
Peeta in the hands of the Capitol. Whatever the case, I've
got someone to tell my secrets to again.
"Who are these people?" I say.
"They're us. If we'd had nukes instead of a few lumps
of coal," he answers.
"I like to think Twelve wouldn't have abandoned the rest
of the rebels back in the Dark Days," I say.
"We might have. If it was that, surrender, or start a
nuclear war," says Gale. "In a way, it's remarkable they
survived at all."
Maybe it's because I still have the ashes of my own
district on my shoes, but for the first time, I give the people
of 13 something I have withheld from them: credit. For
staying alive against all odds. Their early years must have
been terrible, huddled in the chambers beneath the ground
after their city was bombed to dust. Population decimated,
no possible ally to turn to for aid. Over the past seventy-five
years, they've learned to be self-sufficient, turned their
citizens into an army, and built a new society with no help
from anyone. They would be even more powerful if that pox
epidemic hadn't flattened their birthrate and made them so
desperate for a new gene pool and breeders. Maybe they
are militaristic, overly programmed, and somewhat lacking
in a sense of humor. They're here. And willing to take on the
Capitol.
"Still, it took them long enough to show up," I say.
"It wasn't simple. They had to build up a rebel base in
the Capitol, get some sort of underground organized in the
districts," he says. "Then they needed someone to set the
whole thing in motion. They needed you."
"They needed Peeta, too, but they seem to have
forgotten that," I say.
Gale's expression darkens. "Peeta might have done a
lot of damage tonight. Most of the rebels will dismiss what
he said immediately, of course. But there are districts
where the resistance is shakier. The cease-fire's clearly
President Snow's idea. But it seems so reasonable coming
out of Peeta's mouth."
I'm afraid of Gale's answer, but I ask anyway. "Why do
you think he said it?"
"He might have been tortured. Or persuaded. My
guess is he made some kind of deal to protect you. He'd
put forth the idea of the cease-fire if Snow let him present
you as a confused pregnant girl who had no idea what was
going on when she was taken prisoner by the rebels. This
way, if the districts lose, there's still a chance of leniency for
you. If you play it right." I must still look perplexed because
Gale delivers the next line very slowly. "Katniss...he's still
trying to keep you alive."
To keep me alive? And then I understand. The Games
are still on. We have left the arena, but since Peeta and I
weren't killed, his last wish to preserve my life still stands.
His idea is to have me lie low, remain safe and imprisoned,
while the war plays out. Then neither side will really have
cause to kill me. And Peeta? If the rebels win, it will be
disastrous for him. If the Capitol wins, who knows? Maybe
we'll both be allowed to live--if I play it right--to watch the
Games go on....
Images flash through my mind: the spear piercing
Rue's body in the arena, Gale hanging senseless from the
whipping post, the corpse-littered wasteland of my home.
And for what? For what? As my blood turns hot, I remember
other things. My first glimpse of an uprising in District 8.
The victors locked hand in hand the night before the
Quarter Quell. And how it was no accident, my shooting that
arrow into the force field in the arena. How badly I wanted it
to lodge deep in the heart of my enemy.
I spring up, upsetting a box of a hundred pencils,
sending them scattering around the floor.
"What is it?" Gale asks.
"There can't be a cease-fire." I lean down, fumbling as I
shove the sticks of dark gray graphite back into the box.
"We can't go back."
"I know." Gale sweeps up a handful of pencils and taps
them on the floor into perfect alignment.
"Whatever reason Peeta had for saying those things,
he's wrong." The stupid sticks won't go in the box and I
snap several in my frustration.
"I know. Give it here. You're breaking them to bits." He
pulls the box from my hands and refills it with swift, concise
motions.
"He doesn't know what they did to Twelve. If he
could've seen what was on the ground--" I start.
"Katniss, I'm not arguing. If I could hit a button and kill
every living soul working for the Capitol, I would do it.
Without hesitation." He slides the last pencil into the box
and flips the lid closed. "The question is, what are you
going to do?"
It turns out the question that's been eating away at me
has only ever had one possible answer. But it took Peeta's
ploy for me to recognize it.
What am I going to do?
I take a deep breath. My arms rise slightly--as if
recalling the black-and-white wings Cinna gave me--then
come to rest at my sides.
"I'm going to be the Mockingjay."
3
Buttercup's eyes reflect the faint glow of the safety light
over the door as he lies in the crook of Prim's arm, back on
the job, protecting her from the night. She's snuggled close
to my mother. Asleep, they look just as they did the morning
of the reaping that landed me in my first Games. I have a
bed to myself because I'm recuperating and because no
one can sleep with me anyway, what with the nightmares
and the thrashing around.
After tossing and turning for hours, I finally accept that it
will be a wakeful night. Under Buttercup's watchful eye, I
tiptoe across the cold tiled floor to the dresser.
The middle drawer contains my government-issued
clothes. Everyone wears the same gray pants and shirt, the
shirt tucked in at the waist. Underneath the clothes, I keep
the few items I had on me when I was lifted from the arena.
My mockingjay pin. Peeta's token, the gold locket with
photos of my mother and Prim and Gale inside. A silver
parachute that holds a spile for tapping trees, and the pearl
Peeta gave me a few hours before I blew out the force field.
District 13 confiscated my tube of skin ointment for use in
the hospital, and my bow and arrows because only guards
have clearance to carry weapons. They're in safekeeping in
the armory.
I feel around for the parachute and slide my fingers
inside until they close around the pearl. I sit back on my bed
cross-legged and find myself rubbing the smooth iridescent
surface of the pearl back and forth against my lips. For
some reason, it's soothing. A cool kiss from the giver
himself.
"Katniss?" Prim whispers. She's awake, peering at
me through the darkness. "What's wrong?"
"Nothing. Just a bad dream. Go back to sleep." It's
automatic. Shutting Prim and my mother out of things to
shield them.
Careful not to rouse my mother, Prim eases herself
from the bed, scoops up Buttercup, and sits beside me.
She touches the hand that has curled around the pearl.
"You're cold." Taking a spare blanket from the foot of the
bed, she wraps it around all three of us, enveloping me in
her warmth and Buttercup's furry heat as well. "You could
tell me, you know. I'm good at keeping secrets. Even from
Mother."
She's really gone, then. The little girl with the back of
her shirt sticking out like a duck tail, the one who needed
help reaching the dishes, and who begged to see the
frosted cakes in the bakery window. Time and tragedy have
forced her to grow too quickly, at least for my taste, into a
young woman who stitches bleeding wounds and knows
our mother can hear only so much.
"Tomorrow morning, I'm going to agree to be the
Mockingjay," I tell her.
"Because you want to or because you feel forced into
it?" she asks.
I laugh a little. "Both, I guess. No, I want to. I have to, if it
will help the rebels defeat Snow." I squeeze the pearl more
tightly in my fist. "It's just...Peeta. I'm afraid if we do win, the
rebels will execute him as a traitor."
Prim thinks this over. "Katniss, I don't think you
understand how important you are to the cause. Important
people usually get what they want. If you want to keep
Peeta safe from the rebels, you can."
I guess I'm important. They went to a lot of trouble to
rescue me. They took me to 12. "You mean...I could
demand that they give Peeta immunity? And they'd have to
agree to it?"
"I think you could demand almost anything and they'd
have to agree to it." Prim wrinkles her brow. "Only how do
you know they'll keep their word?"
I remember all of the lies Haymitch told Peeta and me
to get us to do what he wanted. What's to keep the rebels
from reneging on the deal? A verbal promise behind closed
doors, even a statement written on paper--these could
easily evaporate after the war. Their existence or validity
denied. Any witnesses in Command will be worthless. In
fact, they'd probably be the ones writing out Peeta's death
warrant. I'll need a much larger pool of witnesses. I'll need
everyone I can get.
"It will have to be public," I say. Buttercup gives a flick
of his tail that I take as agreement. "I'll make Coin announce
it in front of the entire population of Thirteen."
Prim smiles. "Oh, that's good. It's not a guarantee, but
it will be much harder for them to back out of their promise."
I feel the kind of relief that follows an actual solution. "I
should wake you up more often, little duck."
"I wish you would," says Prim. She gives me a kiss.
"Try and sleep now, all right?" And I do.
In the morning, I see that 7:00--Breakfast is directly
followed by 7:30--Command, which is fine since I may as
well start the ball rolling. At the dining hall, I flash my
schedule, which includes some kind of ID number, in front
of a sensor. As I slide my tray along the metal shelf before
the vats of food, I see breakfast is its usual dependable
self--a bowl of hot grain, a cup of milk, and a small scoop of
fruit or vegetables. Today, mashed turnips. All of it comes
from 13's underground farms. I sit at the table assigned to
the Everdeens and the Hawthornes and some other
refugees, and shovel my food down, wishing for seconds,
but there are never seconds here. They have nutrition down
to a science. You leave with enough calories to take you to
the next meal, no more, no less. Serving size is based on
your age, height, body type, health, and amount of physical
labor required by your schedule. The people from 12 are
already getting slightly larger portions than the natives of 13
in an effort to bring us up to weight. I guess bony soldiers
tire too quickly. It's working, though. In just a month, we're
starting to look healthier, particularly the kids.
Gale sets his tray beside me and I try not to stare at his
turnips too pathetically, because I really want more, and
he's already too quick to slip me his food. Even though I
turn my attention to neatly folding my napkin, a spoonful of
turnips slops into my bowl.
"You've got to stop that," I say. But since I'm already
scooping up the stuff, it's not too convincing. "Really. It's
probably illegal or something." They have very strict rules
about food. For instance, if you don't finish something and
want to save it for later, you can't take it from the dining hall.
Apparently, in the early days, there was some incident of
food hoarding. For a couple of people like Gale and me,
who've been in charge of our families' food supply for
years, it doesn't sit well. We know how to be hungry, but not
how to be told how to handle what provisions we have. In
some ways, District 13 is even more controlling than the
Capitol.
"What can they do? They've already got my
communicuff," says Gale.
As I scrape my bowl clean, I have an inspiration. "Hey,
maybe I should make that a condition of being the
Mockingjay."
"That I can feed you turnips?" he says.
"No, that we can hunt." That gets his attention. "We'd
have to give everything to the kitchen. But still, we could..." I
don't have to finish because he knows. We could be
aboveground. Out in the woods. We could be ourselves
again.
"Do it," he says. "Now's the time. You could ask for the
moon and they'd have to find some way to get it."
He doesn't know that I'm already asking for the moon
by demanding they spare Peeta's life. Before I can decide
whether or not to tell him, a bell signals the end of our
eating shift. The thought of facing Coin alone makes me
nervous. "What are you scheduled for?"
Gale checks his arm. "Nuclear History class. Where,
by the way, your absence has been noted."
"I have to go to Command. Come with me?" I ask.
"All right. But they might throw me out after yesterday."
As we go to drop off our trays, he says, "You know, you
better put Buttercup on your list of demands, too. I don't
think the concept of useless pets is well known here."
"Oh, they'll find him a job. Tattoo it on his paw every
morning," I say. But I make a mental note to include him for
Prim's sake.
By the time we get to Command, Coin, Plutarch, and
all their people have already assembled. The sight of Gale
raises some eyebrows, but no one throws him out. My
mental notes have become too jumbled, so I ask for a
piece of paper and a pencil right off. My apparent interest
in the proceedings--the first I've shown since I've been here-
-takes them by surprise. Several looks are exchanged.
Probably they had some extra-special lecture planned for
me. But instead, Coin personally hands me the supplies,
and everyone waits in silence while I sit at the table and
scrawl out my list. Buttercup. Hunting. Peeta's immunity.
Announced in public.
This is it. Probably my only chance to bargain. Think.
What else do you want? I feel him, standing at my shoulder.
Gale, I add to the list. I don't think I can do this without him.
The headache's coming on and my thoughts begin to
tangle. I shut my eyes and start to recite silently.
My name is Katniss Everdeen. I am seventeen years
old. My home is District 12. I was in the Hunger Games. I
escaped. The Capitol hates me. Peeta was taken
prisoner. He is alive. He is a traitor but alive. I have to
keep him alive....
The list. It still seems too small. I should try to think
bigger, beyond our current situation where I am of the
utmost importance, to the future where I may be worth
nothing. Shouldn't I be asking for more? For my family? For
the remainder of my people? My skin itches with the ashes
of the dead. I feel the sickening impact of the skull against
my shoe. The scent of blood and roses stings my nose.
The pencil moves across the page on its own. I open
my eyes and see the wobbly letters. I KILL SNOW. If he's
captured, I want the privilege.
Plutarch gives a discreet cough. "About done there?" I
glance up and notice the clock. I've been sitting here for
twenty minutes. Finnick isn't the only one with attention
problems.
"Yeah," I say. My voice sounds hoarse, so I clear my
throat. "Yeah, so this is the deal. I'll be your Mockingjay."
I wait so they can make their sounds of relief,
congratulate, slap one another on the back. Coin stays as
impassive as ever, watching me, unimpressed.
"But I have some conditions." I smooth out the list and
begin. "My family gets to keep our cat." My tiniest request
sets off an argument. The Capitol rebels see this as a
nonissue--of course, I can keep my pet--while those from
13 spell out what extreme difficulties this presents. Finally
it's worked out that we'll be moved to the top level, which
has the luxury of an eight-inch window aboveground.
Buttercup may come and go to do his business. He will be
expected to feed himself. If he misses curfew, he will be
locked out. If he causes any security problems, he'll be shot
immediately.
That sounds okay. Not so different from how he's been
living since we left. Except for the shooting part. If he looks
too thin, I can slip him a few entrails, provided my next
request is allowed.
"I want to hunt. With Gale. Out in the woods," I say. This
gives everyone pause.
"We won't go far. We'll use our own bows. You can
have the meat for the kitchen," adds Gale.
I hurry on before they can say no. "It's just...I can't
breathe shut up here like a...I would get better, faster, if...I
could hunt."
Plutarch begins to explain the drawbacks here--the
dangers, the extra security, the risk of injury--but Coin cuts
him off. "No. Let them. Give them two hours a day,
deducted from their training time. A quarter-mile radius.
With communication units and tracker anklets. What's
next?"
I skim my list. "Gale. I'll need him with me to do this."
"With you how? Off camera? By your side at all times?
Do you want him presented as your new lover?" Coin asks.
She hasn't said this with any particular malice--quite
the contrary, her words are very matter-of-fact. But my
mouth still drops open in shock. "What?"
"I think we should continue the current romance. A
quick defection from Peeta could cause the audience to
lose sympathy for her," says Plutarch. "Especially since
they think she's pregnant with his child."
"Agreed. So, on-screen, Gale can simply be portrayed
as a fellow rebel. Is that all right?" says Coin. I just stare at
her. She repeats herself impatiently. "For Gale. Will that be
sufficient?"
"We can always work him in as your cousin," says
Fulvia.
"We're not cousins," Gale and I say together.
"Right, but we should probably keep that up for
appearances' sake on camera," says Plutarch. "Off
camera, he's all yours. Anything else?"
I'm rattled by the turn in the conversation. The
implications that I could so readily dispose of Peeta, that
I'm in love with Gale, that the whole thing has been an act.
My cheeks begin to burn. The very notion that I'm devoting
any thought to who I want presented as my lover, given our
current circumstances, is demeaning. I let my anger propel
me into my greatest demand. "When the war is over, if
we've won, Peeta will be pardoned."
Dead silence. I feel Gale's body tense. I guess I should
have told him before, but I wasn't sure how he'd respond.
Not when it involved Peeta.
"No form of punishment will be inflicted," I continue. A
new thought occurs to me. "The same goes for the other
captured tributes, Johanna and Enobaria." Frankly, I don't
care about Enobaria, the vicious District 2 tribute. In fact, I
dislike her, but it seems wrong to leave her out.
"No," says Coin flatly.
"Yes," I shoot back. "It's not their fault you abandoned
them in the arena. Who knows what the Capitol's doing to
them?"
"They'll be tried with other war criminals and treated as
the tribunal sees fit," she says.
"They'll be granted immunity!" I feel myself rising from
my chair, my voice full and resonant. "You will personally
pledge this in front of the entire population of District
Thirteen and the remainder of Twelve. Soon. Today. It will
be recorded for future generations. You will hold yourself
and your government responsible for their safety, or you'll
find yourself another Mockingjay!"
My words hang in the air for a long moment.
"That's her!" I hear Fulvia hiss to Plutarch. "Right there.
With the costume, gunfire in the background, just a hint of
smoke."
"Yes, that's what we want," says Plutarch under his
breath.
I want to glare at them, but I feel it would be a mistake
to turn my attention from Coin. I can see her tallying the cost
of my ultimatum, weighing it against my possible worth.
"What do you say, President?" asks Plutarch. "You
could issue an official pardon, given the circumstances.
The boy...he's not even of age."
"All right," Coin says finally. "But you'd better perform."
"I'll perform when you've made the announcement," I
say.
"Call a national security assembly during Reflection
today," she orders. "I'll make the announcement then. Is
there anything left on your list, Katniss?"
My paper's crumpled into a ball in my right fist. I flatten
the sheet against the table and read the rickety letters.
"Just one more thing. I kill Snow."
For the first time ever, I see the hint of a smile on the
president's lips. "When the time comes, I'll flip you for it."
Maybe she's right. I certainly don't have the sole claim
against Snow's life. And I think I can count on her getting the
job done. "Fair enough."
Coin's eyes have flickered to her arm, the clock. She,
too, has a schedule to adhere to. "I'll leave her in your
hands, then, Plutarch." She exits the room, followed by her
team, leaving only Plutarch, Fulvia, Gale, and myself.
"Excellent. Excellent." Plutarch sinks down, elbows on
the table, rubbing his eyes. "You know what I miss? More
than anything? Coffee. I ask you, would it be so unthinkable
to have something to wash down the gruel and turnips?"
"We didn't think it would be quite so rigid here," Fulvia
explains to us as she massages Plutarch's shoulders. "Not
in the higher ranks."
"Or at least there'd be the option of a little side action,"
says Plutarch. "I mean, even Twelve had a black market,
right?"
"Yeah, the Hob," says Gale. "It's where we traded."
"There, you see? And look how moral you two are!
Virtually incorruptible." Plutarch sighs. "Oh, well, wars don't
last forever. So, glad to have you on the team." He reaches
a hand out to the side, where Fulvia is already extending a
large sketchbook bound in black leather. "You know in
general what we're asking of you, Katniss. I'm aware you
have mixed feelings about participating. I hope this will
help."Plutarch slides the sketchbook across to me. For a
moment, I look at it suspiciously. Then curiosity gets the
better of me. I open the cover to find a picture of myself,
standing straight and strong, in a black uniform. Only one
person could have designed the outfit, at first glance utterly
utilitarian, at second a work of art. The swoop of the helmet,
the curve to the breastplate, the slight fullness of the
sleeves that allows the white folds under the arms to show.
In his hands, I am again a mockingjay.
"Cinna," I whisper.
"Yes. He made me promise not to show you this book
until you'd decided to be the Mockingjay on your own.
Believe me, I was very tempted," says Plutarch. "Go on.
Flip through."
I turn the pages slowly, seeing each detail of the
uniform. The carefully tailored layers of body armor, the
hidden weapons in the boots and belt, the special
reinforcements over my heart. On the final page, under a
sketch of my mockingjay pin, Cinna's written, I'm still
betting on you.
"When did he..." My voice fails me.
"Let's see. Well, after the Quarter Quell announcement.
A few weeks before the Games maybe? There are not only
the sketches. We have your uniforms. Oh, and Beetee's got
something really special waiting for you down in the armory.
I won't spoil it by hinting," says Plutarch.
"You're going to be the best-dressed rebel in history,"
says Gale with a smile. Suddenly, I realize he's been
holding out on me. Like Cinna, he's wanted me to make
this decision all along.
"Our plan is to launch an Airtime Assault," says
Plutarch. "To make a series of what we call propos--which
is short for 'propaganda spots'--featuring you, and
broadcast them to the entire population of Panem."
"How? The Capitol has sole control of the broadcasts,"
says Gale.
"But we have Beetee. About ten years ago, he
essentially redesigned the underground network that
transmits all the programming. He thinks there's a
reasonable chance it can be done. Of course, we'll need
something to air. So, Katniss, the studio awaits your
pleasure." Plutarch turns to his assistant. "Fulvia?"
"Plutarch and I have been talking about how on earth
we can pull this off. We think that it might be best to build
you, our rebel leader, from the outside...in. That is to say,
let's find the most stunning Mockingjay look possible, and
then work your personality up to deserving it!" she says
brightly.
"You already have her uniform," says Gale.
"Yes, but is she scarred and bloody? Is she glowing
with the fire of rebellion? Just how grimy can we make her
without disgusting people? At any rate, she has to be
something. I mean, obviously this"--Fulvia moves in on me
quickly, framing my face with her hands--"won't cut it." I jerk
my head back reflexively but she's already busy gathering
her things. "So, with that in mind, we have another little
surprise for you. Come, come."
Fulvia gives us a wave, and Gale and I follow her and
Plutarch out into the hall.
"So well intended, and yet so insulting," Gale whispers
in my ear.
"Welcome to the Capitol," I mouth back. But Fulvia's
words have no effect on me. I wrap my arms tightly around
the sketchbook and allow myself to feel hopeful. This must
be the right decision. If Cinna wanted it.
We board an elevator, and Plutarch checks his notes.
"Let's see. It's Compartment Three-Nine-Oh-Eight." He
presses a button marked 39, but nothing happens.
"You must have to key it," says Fulvia.
Plutarch pulls a key attached to a thin chain from under
his shirt and inserts it into a slot I hadn't noticed before. The
doors slide shut. "Ah, there we are."
The elevator descends ten, twenty, thirty-plus levels,
farther down than I even knew District 13 went. It opens on
a wide white corridor lined with red doors, which look
almost decorative compared to the gray ones on the upper
floors. Each is plainly marked with a number. 3901, 3902,
3903...
As we step out, I glance behind me to watch the
elevator close and see a metallic grate slide into place over
the regular doors. When I turn, a guard has materialized
from one of the rooms at the far end of the corridor. A door
swings silently shut behind him as he strides toward us.
Plutarch moves to meet him, raising a hand in
greeting, and the rest of us follow behind him. Something
feels very wrong down here. It's more than the reinforced
elevator, or the claustrophobia of being so far underground,
or the caustic smell of antiseptic. One look at Gale's face
and I can tell he senses it as well.
"Good morning, we were just looking for--" Plutarch
begins.
"You have the wrong floor," says the guard abruptly.
"Really?" Plutarch double-checks his notes. "I've got
Three-Nine-Oh-Eight written right here. I wonder if you could
just give a call up to--"
"I'm afraid I have to ask you to leave now. Assignment
discrepancies can be addressed at the Head Office," says
the guard.
It's right ahead of us. Compartment 3908. Just a few
steps away. The door--in fact, all the doors--seem
incomplete. No knobs. They must swing free on hinges like
the one the guard appeared through.
"Where is that again?" asks Fulvia.
"You'll find the Head Office on Level Seven," says the
guard, extending his arms to corral us back to the elevator.
From behind door 3908 comes a sound. Just a tiny
whimper. Like something a cowed dog might make to
avoid being struck, only all too human and familiar. My eyes
meet Gale's for just a moment, but it's long enough for two
people who operate the way we do. I let Cinna's
sketchbook fall at the guard's feet with a loud bang. A
second after he leans down to retrieve it, Gale leans down,
too, intentionally bumping heads. "Oh, I'm sorry," he says
with a light laugh, catching the guard's arms as if to steady
himself, turning him slightly away from me.
That's my chance. I dart around the distracted guard,
push open the door marked 3908, and find them. Halfnaked,
bruised, and shackled to the wall.
My prep team.
4
The stink of unwashed bodies, stale urine, and
infection breaks through the cloud of antiseptic. The three
figures are only just recognizable by their most striking
fashion choices: Venia's gold facial tattoos. Flavius's
orange corkscrew curls. Octavia's light evergreen skin,
which now hangs too loosely, as if her body were a slowly
deflating balloon.
On seeing me, Flavius and Octavia shrink back
against the tiled walls like they're anticipating an attack,
even though I have never hurt them. Unkind thoughts were
my worst offense against them, and those I kept to myself,
so why do they recoil?
The guard's ordering me out, but by the shuffling that
follows, I know Gale has somehow detained him. For
answers, I cross to Venia, who was always the strongest. I
crouch down and take her icy hands, which clutch mine like
vises.
"What happened, Venia?" I ask. "What are you doing
here?"
"They took us. From the Capitol," she says hoarsely.
Plutarch enters behind me. "What on earth is going
on?"
"Who took you?" I press her.
"People," she says vaguely. "The night you broke out."
"We thought it might be comforting for you to have your
regular team," Plutarch says behind me. "Cinna requested
it."
"Cinna requested this?" I snarl at him. Because if
there's one thing I know, it's that Cinna would never have
approved the abuse of these three, who he managed with
gentleness and patience. "Why are they being treated like
criminals?"
"I honestly don't know." There's something in his voice
that makes me believe him, and the pallor on Fulvia's face
confirms it. Plutarch turns to the guard, who's just appeared
in the doorway with Gale right behind him. "I was only told
they were being confined. Why are they being punished?"
"For stealing food. We had to restrain them after an
altercation over some bread," says the guard.
Venia's brows come together as if she's still trying to
make sense of it. "No one would tell us anything. We were
so hungry. It was just one slice she took."
Octavia begins to sob, muffling the sound in her
ragged tunic. I think of how, the first time I survived the
arena, Octavia sneaked me a roll under the table because
she couldn't bear my hunger. I crawl across to her shaking
form. "Octavia?" I touch her and she flinches. "Octavia? It's
going to be all right. I'll get you out of here, okay?"
"This seems extreme," says Plutarch.
"It's because they took a slice of bread?" asks Gale.
"There were repeated infractions leading up to that.
They were warned. Still they took more bread." The guard
pauses a moment, as if puzzled by our density. "You can't
take bread."
I can't get Octavia to uncover her face, but she lifts it
slightly. The shackles on her wrists shift down a few inches,
revealing raw sores beneath them. "I'm bringing you to my
mother." I address the guard. "Unchain them."
The guard shakes his head. "It's not authorized."
"Unchain them! Now!" I yell.
This breaks his composure. Average citizens don't
address him this way. "I have no release orders. And you
have no authority to--"
"Do it on my authority," says Plutarch. "We came to
collect these three anyway. They're needed for Special
Defense. I'll take full responsibility."
The guard leaves to make a call. He returns with a set
of keys. The preps have been forced into cramped body
positions for so long that even once the shackles are
removed, they have trouble walking. Gale, Plutarch, and I
have to help them. Flavius's foot catches on a metal grate
over a circular opening in the floor, and my stomach
contracts when I think of why a room would need a drain.
The stains of human misery that must have been hosed off
these white tiles...
In the hospital, I find my mother, the only one I trust to
care for them. It takes her a minute to place the three, given
their current condition, but already she wears a look of
consternation. And I know it's not a result of seeing abused
bodies, because they were her daily fare in District 12, but
the realization that this sort of thing goes on in 13 as well.
My mother was welcomed into the hospital, but she's
viewed as more of a nurse than a doctor, despite her
lifetime of healing. Still, no one interferes when she guides
the trio into an examination room to assess their injuries. I
plant myself on a bench in the hall outside the hospital
entrance, waiting to hear her verdict. She will be able to
read in their bodies the pain inflicted upon them.
Gale sits next to me and puts an arm around my
shoulder. "She'll fix them up." I give a nod, wondering if he's
thinking about his own brutal flogging back in 12.
Plutarch and Fulvia take the bench across from us but
don't offer any comments on the state of my prep team. If
they had no knowledge of the mistreatment, then what do
they make of this move on President Coin's part? I decide
to help them out.
"I guess we've all been put on notice," I say.
"What? No. What do you mean?" asks Fulvia.
"Punishing my prep team's a warning," I tell her. "Not
just to me. But to you, too. About who's really in control and
what happens if she's not obeyed. If you had any delusions
about having power, I'd let them go now. Apparently, a
Capitol pedigree is no protection here. Maybe it's even a
liability."
"There is no comparison between Plutarch, who
masterminded the rebel breakout, and those three
beauticians," says Fulvia icily.
I shrug. "If you say so, Fulvia. But what would happen if
you got on Coin's bad side? My prep team was kidnapped.
They can at least hope to one day return to the Capitol.
Gale and I can live in the woods. But you? Where would you
two run?"
"Perhaps we're a little more necessary to the war effort
than you give us credit for," says Plutarch, unconcerned.
"Of course you are. The tributes were necessary to the
Games, too. Until they weren't," I say. "And then we were
very disposable--right, Plutarch?"
That ends the conversation. We wait in silence until my
mother finds us. "They'll be all right," she reports. "No
permanent physical injuries."
"Good. Splendid," says Plutarch. "How soon can they
be put to work?"
"Probably tomorrow," she answers. "You'll have to
expect some emotional instability, after what they've been
through. They were particularly ill prepared, coming from
their life in the Capitol."
"Weren't we all?" says Plutarch.
Either because the prep team's incapacitated or I'm
too on edge, Plutarch releases me from Mockingjay duties
for the rest of the day. Gale and I head down to lunch, where
we're served bean and onion stew, a thick slice of bread,
and a cup of water. After Venia's story, the bread sticks in
my throat, so I slide the rest of it onto Gale's tray. Neither of
us speaks much during lunch, but when our bowls are
clean, Gale pulls up his sleeve, revealing his schedule. "I've
got training next."
I tug up my sleeve and hold my arm next to his. "Me,
too." I remember that training equals hunting now.
My eagerness to escape into the woods, if only for two
hours, overrides my current concerns. An immersion into
greenery and sunlight will surely help me sort out my
thoughts. Once off the main corridors, Gale and I race like
schoolchildren for the armory, and by the time we arrive, I'm
breathless and dizzy. A reminder that I'm not fully
recovered. The guards provide our old weapons, as well as
knives and a burlap sack that's meant for a game bag. I
tolerate having the tracker clamped to my ankle, try to look
as if I'm listening when they explain how to use the handheld
communicator. The only thing that sticks in my head is that
it has a clock, and we must be back inside 13 by the
designated hour or our hunting privileges will be revoked.
This is one rule I think I will make an effort to abide.
We go outside into the large, fenced-in training area
beside the woods. Guards open the well-oiled gates
without comment. We would be hard-pressed to get past
this fence on our own--thirty feet high and always buzzing
with electricity, topped with razor-sharp curls of steel. We
move through the woods until the view of the fence has
been obscured. In a small clearing, we pause and drop
back our heads to bask in the sunlight. I turn in a circle, my
arms extended at my sides, revolving slowly so as not to
set the world spinning.
The lack of rain I saw in 12 has damaged the plants
here as well, leaving some with brittle leaves, building a
crunchy carpet under our feet. We take off our shoes. Mine
don't fit right anyway, since in the spirit of waste-not-wantnot
that rules 13, I was issued a pair someone had
outgrown. Apparently, one of us walks funny, because
they're broken in all wrong.
We hunt, like in the old days. Silent, needing no words
to communicate, because here in the woods we move as
two parts of one being. Anticipating each other's
movements, watching each other's backs. How long has it
been? Eight months? Nine? Since we had this freedom?
It's not exactly the same, given all that's happened and the
trackers on our ankles and the fact that I have to rest so
often. But it's about as close to happiness as I think I can
currently get.
The animals here are not nearly suspicious enough.
That extra moment it takes to place our unfamiliar scent
means their death. In an hour and a half, we've got a mixed
dozen--rabbits, squirrels, and turkeys--and decide to knock
off to spend the remaining time by a pond that must be fed
by an underground spring, since the water's cool and
sweet. When Gale offers to clean the game, I don't object. I
stick a few mint leaves on my tongue, close my eyes, and
lean back against a rock, soaking in the sounds, letting the
scorching afternoon sun burn my skin, almost at peace until
Gale's voice interrupts me. "Katniss, why do you care so
much about your prep team?"
I open my eyes to see if he's joking, but he's frowning
down at the rabbit he's skinning. "Why shouldn't I?"
"Hm. Let's see. Because they've spent the last year
prettying you up for slaughter?" he suggests.
"It's more complicated than that. I know them. They're
not evil or cruel. They're not even smart. Hurting them, it's
like hurting children. They don't see...I mean, they don't
know..." I get knotted up in my words.
"They don't know what, Katniss?" he says. "That
tributes--who are the actual children involved here, not your
trio of freaks--are forced to fight to the death? That you
were going into that arena for people's amusement? Was
that a big secret in the Capitol?"
"No. But they don't view it the way we do," I say.
"They're raised on it and--"
"Are you actually defending them?" He slips the skin
from the rabbit in one quick move.
That stings, because, in fact, I am, and it's ridiculous. I
struggle to find a logical position. "I guess I'm defending
anyone who's treated like that for taking a slice of bread.
Maybe it reminds me too much of what happened to you
over a turkey!"
Still, he's right. It does seem strange, my level of
concern over the prep team. I should hate them and want to
see them strung up. But they're so clueless, and they
belonged to Cinna, and he was on my side, right?
"I'm not looking for a fight," Gale says. "But I don't think
Coin was sending you some big message by punishing
them for breaking the rules here. She probably thought
you'd see it as a favor." He stuffs the rabbit in the sack and
rises. "We better get going if we want to make it back on
time."
I ignore his offer of a hand up and get to my feet
unsteadily. "Fine." Neither of us talks on the way back, but
once we're inside the gate, I think of something else.
"During the Quarter Quell, Octavia and Flavius had to quit
because they couldn't stop crying over me going back in.
And Venia could barely say good-bye."
"I'll try and keep that in mind as they...remake you,"
says Gale.
"Do," I say.
We hand the meat over to Greasy Sae in the kitchen.
She likes District 13 well enough, even though she thinks
the cooks are somewhat lacking in imagination. But a
woman who came up with a palatable wild dog and rhubarb
stew is bound to feel as if her hands are tied here.
Exhausted from hunting and my lack of sleep, I go
back to my compartment to find it stripped bare, only to
remember we've been moved because of Buttercup. I
make my way up to the top floor and find Compartment E. It
looks exactly like Compartment 307, except for the window-
-two feet wide, eight inches high--centered at the top of the
outside wall. There's a heavy metal plate that fastens over
it, but right now it's propped open, and a certain cat is
nowhere to be seen. I stretch out on my bed, and a shaft of
afternoon sunlight plays on my face. The next thing I know,
my sister is waking me for 18:00--Reflection.
Prim tells me they've been announcing the assembly
since lunch. The entire population, except those needed for
essential jobs, is required to attend. We follow directions to
the Collective, a huge room that easily holds the thousands
who show up. You can tell it was built for a larger gathering,
and perhaps it held one before the pox epidemic. Prim
quietly points out the widespread fallout from that disaster--
the pox scars on people's bodies, the slightly disfigured
children. "They've suffered a lot here," she says.
After this morning, I'm in no mood to feel sorry for 13.
"No more than we did in Twelve," I say. I see my mother
lead in a group of mobile patients, still wearing their
hospital nightgowns and robes. Finnick stands among
them, looking dazed but gorgeous. In his hands he holds a
piece of thin rope, less than a foot in length, too short for
even him to fashion into a usable noose. His fingers move
rapidly, automatically tying and unraveling various knots as
he gazes about. Probably part of his therapy. I cross to him
and say, "Hey, Finnick." He doesn't seem to notice, so I
nudge him to get his attention. "Finnick! How are you
doing?"
"Katniss," he says, gripping my hand. Relieved to see
a familiar face, I think. "Why are we meeting here?"
"I told Coin I'd be her Mockingjay. But I made her
promise to give the other tributes immunity if the rebels
won," I tell him. "In public, so there are plenty of witnesses."
"Oh. Good. Because I worry about that with Annie. That
she'll say something that could be construed as traitorous
without knowing it," says Finnick.
Annie. Uh-oh. Totally forgot her. "Don't worry, I took
care of it." I give Finnick's hand a squeeze and head
straight for the podium at the front of the room. Coin, who is
glancing over her statement, raises her eyebrows at me. "I
need you to add Annie Cresta to the immunity list," I tell her.
The president frowns slightly. "Who's that?"
"She's Finnick Odair's--" What? I don't really know
what to call her. "She's Finnick's friend. From District Four.
Another victor. She was arrested and taken to the Capitol
when the arena blew up."
"Oh, the mad girl. That's not really necessary," she
says. "We don't make a habit of punishing anyone that
frail."
I think of the scene I walked in on this morning. Of
Octavia huddled against the wall. Of how Coin and I must
have vastly different definitions of frailty. But I only say, "No?
Then it shouldn't be a problem to add Annie."
"All right," says the president, penciling in Annie's
name. "Do you want to be up here with me for the
announcement?" I shake my head. "I didn't think so. Better
hurry and lose yourself in the crowd. I'm about to begin." I
make my way back to Finnick.
Words are another thing not wasted in 13. Coin calls
the audience to attention and tells them I have consented to
be the Mockingjay, provided the other victors--Peeta,
Johanna, Enobaria, and Annie--will be granted full pardon
for any damage they do to the rebel cause. In the rumbling
of the crowd, I hear the dissent. I suppose no one doubted I
would want to be the Mockingjay. So naming a price--one
that spares possible enemies--angers them. I stand
indifferent to the hostile looks thrown my way.
The president allows a few moments of unrest, and
then continues in her brisk fashion. Only now the words
coming out of her mouth are news to me. "But in return for
this unprecedented request, Soldier Everdeen has
promised to devote herself to our cause. It follows that any
deviance from her mission, in either motive or deed, will be
viewed as a break in this agreement. The immunity would
be terminated and the fate of the four victors determined by
the law of District Thirteen. As would her own. Thank you."
In other words, I step out of line and we're all dead.
5
Another force to contend with. Another power player
who has decided to use me as a piece in her games,
although things never seem to go according to plan. First
there were the Gamemakers, making me their star and
then scrambling to recover from that handful of poisonous
berries. Then President Snow, trying to use me to put out
the flames of rebellion, only to have my every move become
inflammatory. Next, the rebels ensnaring me in the metal
claw that lifted me from the arena, designating me to be
their Mockingjay, and then having to recover from the shock
that I might not want the wings. And now Coin, with her
fistful of precious nukes and her well-oiled machine of a
district, finding it's even harder to groom a Mockingjay than
to catch one. But she has been the quickest to determine
that I have an agenda of my own and am therefore not to be
trusted. She has been the first to publicly brand me as a
threat.
I run my fingers through the thick layer of bubbles in my
tub. Cleaning me up is just a preliminary step to
determining my new look. With my acid-damaged hair,
sunburned skin, and ugly scars, the prep team has to make
me pretty and then damage, burn, and scar me in a more
attractive way.
"Remake her to Beauty Base Zero," Fulvia ordered
first thing this morning. "We'll work from there." Beauty
Base Zero turns out to be what a person would look like if
they stepped out of bed looking flawless but natural. It
means my nails are perfectly shaped but not polished. My
hair soft and shiny but not styled. My skin smooth and clear
but not painted. Wax the body hair and erase the dark
circles, but don't make any noticeable enhancements. I
suppose Cinna gave the same instructions the first day I
arrived as a tribute in the Capitol. Only that was different,
since I was a contestant. As a rebel, I thought I'd get to look
more like myself. But it seems a televised rebel has her
own standards to live up to.
After I rinse the lather from my body, I turn to find
Octavia waiting with a towel. She is so altered from the
woman I knew in the Capitol, stripped of the gaudy clothing,
the heavy makeup, the dyes and jewelry and knickknacks
she adorned her hair with. I remember how one day she
showed up with bright pink tresses studded with blinking
colored lights shaped like mice. She told me she had
several mice at home as pets. The thought repulsed me at
the time, since we consider mice vermin, unless cooked.
But perhaps Octavia liked them because they were small,
soft, and squeaky. Like her. As she pats me dry, I try to
become acquainted with the District 13 Octavia. Her real
hair turns out to be a nice auburn. Her face is ordinary but
has an undeniable sweetness. She's younger than I thought.
Maybe early twenties. Devoid of the three-inch decorative
nails, her fingers appear almost stubby, and they can't stop
trembling. I want to tell her it's okay, that I'll see that Coin
never hurts her again. But the multicolored bruises
flowering under her green skin only remind me how
impotent I am.
Flavius, too, appears washed out without his purple
lipstick and bright clothes. He's managed to get his orange
ringlets back in some sort of order, though. It's Venia who's
the least changed. Her aqua hair lies flat instead of in
spikes and you can see the roots growing in gray.
However, the tattoos were always her most striking
characteristic, and they're as golden and shocking as ever.
She comes and takes the towel from Octavia's hands.
"Katniss is not going to hurt us," she says quietly but
firmly to Octavia. "Katniss did not even know we were here.
Things will be better now." Octavia gives a slight nod but
doesn't dare look me in the eye.
It's no simple job getting me back to Beauty Base
Zero, even with the elaborate arsenal of products, tools,
and gadgets Plutarch had the foresight to bring from the
Capitol. My preps do pretty well until they try to address the
spot on my arm where Johanna dug out the tracker. None
of the medical team was focusing on looks when they
patched up the gaping hole. Now I have a lumpy, jagged
scar that ripples out over a space the size of an apple.
Usually, my sleeve covers it, but the way Cinna's
Mockingjay costume is designed, the sleeves stop just
above the elbow. It's such a concern that Fulvia and
Plutarch are called in to discuss it. I swear, the sight of it
triggers Fulvia's gag reflex. For someone who works with a
Gamemaker, she's awfully sensitive. But I guess she's used
to seeing unpleasant things only on a screen.
"Everyone knows I have a scar here," I say sullenly.
"Knowing it and seeing it are two different things,"
says Fulvia. "It's positively repulsive. Plutarch and I will think
of something during lunch."
"It'll be fine," says Plutarch with a dismissive wave of
his hand. "Maybe an armband or something."
Disgusted, I get dressed so I can head to the dining
hall. My prep team huddles in a little group by the door. "Are
they bringing your food here?" I ask.
"No," says Venia. "We're supposed to go to a dining
hall."
I sigh inwardly as I imagine walking into the dining hall,
trailed by these three. But people always stare at me
anyway. This will be more of the same. "I'll show you where
it is," I say. "Come on."
The covert glances and quiet murmurs I usually evoke
are nothing compared to the reaction brought on by the
sight of my bizarre-looking prep team. The gaping mouths,
the finger pointing, the exclamations. "Just ignore them," I
tell my prep team. Eyes downcast, with mechanical
movements, they follow me through the line, accepting
bowls of grayish fish and okra stew and cups of water.
We take seats at my table, beside a group from the
Seam. They show a little more restraint than the people
from 13 do, although it may just be from embarrassment.
Leevy, who was my neighbor back in 12, gives a cautious
hello to the preps, and Gale's mother, Hazelle, who must
know about their imprisonment, holds up a spoonful of the
stew. "Don't worry," she says. "Tastes better than it looks."
But it's Posy, Gale's five-year-old sister, who helps the
most. She scoots along the bench to Octavia and touches
her skin with a tentative finger. "You're green. Are you
sick?"
"It's a fashion thing, Posy. Like wearing lipstick," I say.
"It's meant to be pretty," whispers Octavia, and I can
see the tears threatening to spill over her lashes.
Posy considers this and says matter-of-factly, "I think
you'd be pretty in any color."
The tiniest of smiles forms on Octavia's lips. "Thank
you."
"If you really want to impress Posy, you'll have to dye
yourself bright pink," says Gale, thumping his tray down
beside me. "That's her favorite color." Posy giggles and
slides back down to her mother. Gale nods at Flavius's
bowl. "I wouldn't let that get cold. It doesn't improve the
consistency."
Everyone gets down to eating. The stew doesn't taste
bad, but there's a certain sliminess that's hard to get
around. Like you have to swallow every bite three times
before it really goes down.
Gale, who's not usually much of a talker during meals,
makes an effort to keep the conversation going, asking
about the makeover. I know it's his attempt at smoothing
things over. We argued last night after he suggested I'd left
Coin no choice but to counter my demand for the victors'
safety with one of her own. "Katniss, she's running this
district. She can't do it if it seems like she's caving in to
your will."
"You mean she can't stand any dissent, even if it's fair,"
I'd countered.
"I mean you put her in a bad position. Making her give
Peeta and the others immunity when we don't even know
what sort of damage they might cause," Gale had said.
"So I should've just gone with the program and let the
other tributes take their chances? Not that it matters,
because that's what we're all doing anyway!" That was
when I'd slammed the door in his face. I hadn't sat with him
at breakfast, and when Plutarch had sent him down to
training this morning, I'd let him go without a word. I know he
only spoke out of concern for me, but I really need him to be
on my side, not Coin's. How can he not know that?
After lunch, Gale and I are scheduled to go down to
Special Defense to meet Beetee. As we ride the elevator,
Gale finally says, "You're still angry."
"And you're still not sorry," I reply.
"I still stand by what I said. Do you want me to lie about
it?" he asks.
"No, I want you to rethink it and come up with the right
opinion," I tell him. But this just makes him laugh. I have to
let it go. There's no point in trying to dictate what Gale
thinks. Which, if I'm honest, is one reason I trust him.
The Special Defense level is situated almost as far
down as the dungeons where we found the prep team. It's a
beehive of rooms full of computers, labs, research
equipment, and testing ranges.
When we ask for Beetee, we're directed through the
maze until we reach an enormous plate-glass window.
Inside is the first beautiful thing I've seen in the District 13
compound: a replication of a meadow, filled with real trees
and flowering plants, and alive with hummingbirds. Beetee
sits motionless in a wheelchair at the center of the
meadow, watching a spring-green bird hover in midair as it
sips nectar from a large orange blossom. His eyes follow
the bird as it darts away, and he catches sight of us. He
gives a friendly wave for us to join him inside.
The air's cool and breathable, not humid and muggy as
I'd expected. From all sides comes the whir of tiny wings,
which I used to confuse with the sound of insects in our
woods at home. I have to wonder what sort of fluke allowed
such a pleasing place to be built here.
Beetee still has the pallor of someone in
convalescence, but behind those ill-fitting glasses, his eyes
are alight with excitement. "Aren't they magnificent?
Thirteen has been studying their aerodynamics here for
years. Forward and backward flight, and speeds up to sixty
miles per hour. If only I could build you wings like these,
Katniss!"
"Doubt I could manage them, Beetee," I laugh.
"Here one second, gone the next. Can you bring a
hummingbird down with an arrow?" he asks.
"I've never tried. Not much meat on them," I answer.
"No. And you're not one to kill for sport," he says. "I bet
they'd be hard to shoot, though."
"You could snare them maybe," Gale says. His face
takes on that distant look it wears when he's working
something out. "Take a net with a very fine mesh. Enclose
an area and leave a mouth of a couple square feet. Bait the
inside with nectar flowers. While they're feeding, snap the
mouth shut. They'd fly away from the noise but only
encounter the far side of the net."
"Would that work?" asks Beetee.
"I don't know. Just an idea," says Gale. "They might
outsmart it."
"They might. But you're playing on their natural instincts
to flee danger. Thinking like your prey...that's where you find
their vulnerabilities," says Beetee.
I remember something I don't like to think about. In
preparation for the Quell, I saw a tape where Beetee, who
was still a boy, connected two wires that electrocuted a
pack of kids who were hunting him. The convulsing bodies,
the grotesque expressions. Beetee, in the moments that
led up to his victory in those long-ago Hunger Games,
watched the others die. Not his fault. Only self-defense. We
were all acting only in self-defense....
Suddenly, I want to leave the hummingbird room
before somebody starts setting up a snare. "Beetee,
Plutarch said you had something for me."
"Right. I do. Your new bow." He presses a hand control
on the arm of the chair and wheels out of the room. As we
follow him through the twists and turns of Special Defense,
he explains about the chair. "I can walk a little now. It's just
that I tire so quickly. It's easier for me to get around this
way. How's Finnick doing?"
"He's...he's having concentration problems," I answer. I
don't want to say he had a complete mental meltdown.
"Concentration problems, eh?" Beetee smiles grimly.
"If you knew what Finnick's been through the last few years,
you'd know how remarkable it is he's still with us at all. Tell
him I've been working on a new trident for him, though, will
you? Something to distract him a little." Distraction seems
to be the last thing Finnick needs, but I promise to pass on
the message.
Four soldiers guard the entrance to the hall marked
Special Weaponry. Checking the schedules printed on our
forearms is just a preliminary step. We also have
fingerprint, retinal, and DNA scans, and have to step
through special metal detectors. Beetee has to leave his
wheelchair outside, although they provide him with another
once we're through security. I find the whole thing bizarre
because I can't imagine anyone raised in District 13 being
a threat the government would have to guard against. Have
these precautions been put in place because of the recent
influx of immigrants?
At the door of the armory, we encounter a second
round of identification checks--as if my DNA might have
changed in the time it took to walk twenty yards down the
hallway--and are finally allowed to enter the weapons
collection. I have to admit the arsenal takes my breath
away. Row upon row of firearms, launchers, explosives,
armored vehicles. "Of course, the Airborne Division is
housed separately," Beetee tells us.
"Of course," I say, as if this would be self-evident. I
don't know where a simple bow and arrow could possibly
find a place in all this high-tech equipment, but then we
come upon a wall of deadly archery weapons. I've played
with a lot of the Capitol's weapons in training, but none
designed for military combat. I focus my attention on a
lethal-looking bow so loaded down with scopes and
gadgetry, I'm certain I can't even lift it, let alone shoot it.
"Gale, maybe you'd like to try out a few of these," says
Beetee.
"Seriously?" Gale asks.
"You'll be issued a gun eventually for battle, of course.
But if you appear as part of Katniss's team in the propos,
one of these would look a little showier. I thought you might
like to find one that suits you," says Beetee.
"Yeah, I would." Gale's hands close around the very
bow that caught my attention a moment ago, and he hefts it
onto his shoulder. He points it around the room, peering
through the scope.
"That doesn't seem very fair to the deer," I say.
"Wouldn't be using it on deer, would I?" he answers.
"I'll be right back," says Beetee. He presses a code
into a panel, and a small doorway opens. I watch until he's
disappeared and the door's shut.
"So, it'd be easy for you? Using that on people?" I ask.
"I didn't say that." Gale drops the bow to his side. "But
if I'd had a weapon that could've stopped what I saw
happen in Twelve...if I'd had a weapon that could have kept
you out of the arena...I'd have used it."
"Me, too," I admit. But I don't know what to tell him
about the aftermath of killing a person. About how they
never leave you.
Beetee wheels back in with a tall, black rectangular
case awkwardly positioned between his footrest and his
shoulder. He comes to a halt and tilts it toward me. "For
you."
I set the case flat on the floor and undo the latches
along one side. The top opens on silent hinges. Inside the
case, on a bed of crushed maroon velvet, lies a stunning
black bow. "Oh," I whisper in admiration. I lift it carefully into
the air to admire the exquisite balance, the elegant design,
and the curve of the limbs that somehow suggests the
wings of a bird extended in flight. There's something else. I
have to hold very still to make sure I'm not imagining it. No,
the bow is alive in my hands. I press it against my cheek
and feel the slight hum travel through the bones of my face.
"What's it doing?" I ask.
"Saying hello," explains Beetee with a grin. "It heard
your voice."
"It recognizes my voice?" I ask.
"Only your voice," he tells me. "You see, they wanted
me to design a bow based purely on looks. As part of your
costume, you know? But I kept thinking, What a waste. I
mean, what if you do need it sometime? As more than a
fashion accessory? So I left the outside simple, and left the
inside to my imagination. Best explained in practice,
though. Want to try those out?"
We do. A target range has already been prepared for
us. The arrows that Beetee designed are no less
remarkable than the bow. Between the two, I can shoot with
accuracy over one hundred yards. The variety of arrows--
razor sharp, incendiary, explosive--turn the bow into a
multipurpose weapon. Each one is recognizable by a
distinctive colored shaft. I have the option of voice override
at any time, but have no idea why I would use it. To
deactivate the bow's special properties, I need only tell it
"Good night." Then it goes to sleep until the sound of my
voice wakes it again.
I'm in good spirits by the time I get back to the prep
team, leaving Beetee and Gale behind. I sit patiently
through the rest of the paint job and don my costume, which
now includes a bloody bandage over the scar on my arm to
indicate I've been in recent combat. Venia affixes my
mockingjay pin over my heart. I take up my bow and the
sheath of normal arrows that Beetee made, knowing they
would never let me walk around with the loaded ones. Then
we're out on the soundstage, where I seem to stand for
hours while they adjust makeup and lighting and smoke
levels. Eventually, the commands coming via intercom from
the invisible people in the mysterious glassed-in booth
become fewer and fewer. Fulvia and Plutarch spend more
time studying and less time adjusting me. Finally, there's
quiet on the set. For a full five minutes I am simply
considered. Then Plutarch says, "I think that does it."
I'm beckoned over to a monitor. They play back the last
few minutes of taping and I watch the woman on the screen.
Her body seems larger in stature, more imposing than
mine. Her face smudged but sexy. Her brows black and
drawn in an angle of defiance. Wisps of smoke--suggesting
she has either just been extinguished or is about to burst
into flames--rise from her clothes. I do not know who this
person is.
Finnick, who's been wandering around the set for a
few hours, comes up behind me and says with a hint of his
old humor, "They'll either want to kill you, kiss you, or be
you."
Everyone's so excited, so pleased with their work. It's
nearly time to break for dinner, but they insist we continue.
Tomorrow we'll focus on speeches and interviews and have
me pretend to be in rebel battles. Today they want just one
slogan, just one line that they can work into a short propo to
show to Coin.
"People of Panem, we fight, we dare, we end our
hunger for justice!" That's the line. I can tell by the way they
present it that they've spent months, maybe years, working
it out and are really proud of it. It seems like a mouthful to
me, though. And stiff. I can't imagine actually saying it in
real life--unless I was using a Capitol accent and making
fun of it. Like when Gale and I used to imitate Effie Trinket's
"May the odds be ever in your favor!" But Fulvia's right in
my face, describing a battle I've just been in, and how my
comrades-in-arms are all lying dead around me, and how,
to rally the living, I must turn to the camera and shout out the
line!
I'm hustled back to my place, and the smoke machine
kicks in. Someone calls for quiet, the cameras start rolling,
and I hear "Action!" So I hold my bow over my head and yell
with all the anger I can muster, "People of Panem, we fight,
we dare, we end our hunger for justice!"
There's dead silence on the set. It goes on. And on.
Finally, the intercom crackles and Haymitch's acerbic
laugh fills the studio. He contains himself just long enough
to say, "And that, my friends, is how a revolution dies."
6
The shock of hearing Haymitch's voice yesterday, of
learning that he was not only functional but had some
measure of control over my life again, enraged me. I left the
studio directly and refused to acknowledge his comments
from the booth today. Even so, I knew immediately he was
right about my performance.
It took the whole of this morning for him to convince the
others of my limitations. That I can't pull it off. I can't stand in
a television studio wearing a costume and makeup in a
cloud of fake smoke and rally the districts to victory. It's
amazing, really, how long I have survived the cameras. The
credit for that, of course, goes to Peeta. Alone, I can't be
the Mockingjay.
We gather around the huge table in Command. Coin
and her people. Plutarch, Fulvia, and my prep team. A
group from 12 that includes Haymitch and Gale, but also a
few others I can't explain, like Leevy and Greasy Sae. At
the last minute, Finnick wheels Beetee in, accompanied by
Dalton, the cattle expert from 10. I suppose that Coin has
assembled this strange assortment of people as witnesses
to my failure.
However, it's Haymitch who welcomes everyone, and
by his words I understand that they have come at his
personal invitation. This is the first time we've been in a
room together since I clawed him. I avoid looking at him
directly, but I catch a glimpse of his reflection in one of the
shiny control consoles along the wall. He looks slightly
yellow and has lost a lot of weight, giving him a shrunken
appearance. For a second, I'm afraid he's dying. I have to
remind myself that I don't care.
The first thing Haymitch does is to show the footage
we've just shot. I seem to have reached some new low
under Plutarch and Fulvia's guidance. Both my voice and
body have a jerky, disjointed quality, like a puppet being
manipulated by unseen forces.
"All right," Haymitch says when it's over. "Would
anyone like to argue that this is of use to us in winning the
war?" No one does. "That saves time. So, let's all be quiet
for a minute. I want everyone to think of one incident where
Katniss Everdeen genuinely moved you. Not where you
were jealous of her hairstyle, or her dress went up in flames
or she made a halfway decent shot with an arrow. Not
where Peeta was making you like her. I want to hear one
moment where she made you feel something real."
Quiet stretches out and I'm beginning to think it will
never end, when Leevy speaks up. "When she volunteered
to take Prim's place at the reaping. Because I'm sure she
thought she was going to die."
"Good. Excellent example," says Haymitch. He takes a
purple marker and writes on a notepad. "Volunteered for
sister at reaping." Haymitch looks around the table.
"Somebody else."
I'm surprised that the next speaker is Boggs, who I
think of as a muscular robot that does Coin's bidding.
"When she sang the song. While the little girl died."
Somewhere in my head an image surfaces of Boggs with a
young boy perched up on his hip. In the dining hall, I think.
Maybe he's not a robot after all.
"Who didn't get choked up at that, right?" says
Haymitch, writing it down.
"I cried when she drugged Peeta so she could go get
him medicine and when she kissed him good-bye!" blurts
out Octavia. Then she covers her mouth, like she's sure this
was a bad mistake.
But Haymitch only nods. "Oh, yeah. Drugs Peeta to
save his life. Very nice."
The moments begin to come thick and fast and in no
particular order. When I took Rue on as an ally. Extended
my hand to Chaff on interview night. Tried to carry Mags.
And again and again when I held out those berries that
meant different things to different people. Love for Peeta.
Refusal to give in under impossible odds. Defiance of the
Capitol's inhumanity.
Haymitch holds up the notepad. "So, the question is,
what do all of these have in common?"
"They were Katniss's," says Gale quietly. "No one told
her what to do or say."
"Unscripted, yes!" says Beetee. He reaches over and
pats my hand. "So we should just leave you alone, right?"
People laugh. I even smile a little.
"Well, that's all very nice but not very helpful," says
Fulvia peevishly. "Unfortunately, her opportunities for being
wonderful are rather limited here in Thirteen. So unless
you're suggesting we toss her into the middle of combat--"
"That's exactly what I'm suggesting," says Haymitch.
"Put her out in the field and just keep the cameras rolling."
"But people think she's pregnant," Gale points out.
"We'll spread the word that she lost the baby from the
electrical shock in the arena," Plutarch replies. "Very sad.
Very unfortunate."
The idea of sending me into combat is controversial.
But Haymitch has a pretty tight case. If I perform well only in
real-life circumstances, then into them I should go. "Every
time we coach her or give her lines, the best we can hope
for is okay. It has to come from her. That's what people are
responding to."
"Even if we're careful, we can't guarantee her safety,"
says Boggs. "She'll be a target for every--"
"I want to go," I break in. "I'm no help to the rebels
here."
"And if you're killed?" asks Coin.
"Make sure you get some footage. You can use that,
anyway," I answer.
"Fine," says Coin. "But let's take it one step at a time.
Find the least dangerous situation that can evoke some
spontaneity in you." She walks around Command, studying
the illuminated district maps that show the ongoing troop
positions in the war. "Take her into Eight this afternoon.
There was heavy bombing this morning, but the raid seems
to have run its course. I want her armed with a squad of
bodyguards. Camera crew on the ground. Haymitch, you'll
be airborne and in contact with her. Let's see what happens
there. Does anyone have any other comments?"
"Wash her face," says Dalton. Everyone turns to him.
"She's still a girl and you made her look thirty-five. Feels
wrong. Like something the Capitol would do."
As Coin adjourns the meeting, Haymitch asks her if he
can speak to me privately. The others leave except for
Gale, who lingers uncertainly by my side. "What are you
worried about?" Haymitch asks him. "I'm the one who
needs the bodyguard."
"It's okay," I tell Gale, and he goes. Then there's just the
hum of the instruments, the purr of the ventilation system.
Haymitch takes the seat across from me. "We're going
to have to work together again. So, go ahead. Just say it."
I think of the snarling, cruel exchange back on the
hovercraft. The bitterness that followed. But all I say is "I
can't believe you didn't rescue Peeta."
"I know," he replies.
There's a sense of incompleteness. And not because
he hasn't apologized. But because we were a team. We
had a deal to keep Peeta safe. A drunken, unrealistic deal
made in the dark of night, but a deal just the same. And in
my heart of hearts, I know we both failed.
"Now you say it," I tell him.
"I can't believe you let him out of your sight that night,"
says Haymitch.
I nod. That's it. "I play it over and over in my head. What
I could have done to keep him by my side without breaking
the alliance. But nothing comes to me."
"You didn't have a choice. And even if I could've made
Plutarch stay and rescue him that night, the whole
hovercraft would've gone down. We barely got out as it
was." I finally meet Haymitch's eyes. Seam eyes. Gray and
deep and ringed with the circles of sleepless nights. "He's
not dead yet, Katniss."
"We're still in the game." I try to say this with optimism,
but my voice cracks.
"Still in. And I'm still your mentor." Haymitch points his
marker at me. "When you're on the ground, remember I'm
airborne. I'll have the better view, so do what I tell you."
"We'll see," I answer.
I return to the Remake Room and watch the streaks of
makeup disappear down the drain as I scrub my face
clean. The person in the mirror looks ragged, with her
uneven skin and tired eyes, but she looks like me. I rip the
armband off, revealing the ugly scar from the tracker. There.
That looks like me, too.
Since I'll be in a combat zone, Beetee helps me with
armor Cinna designed. A helmet of some interwoven metal
that fits close to my head. The material's supple, like fabric,
and can be drawn back like a hood in case I don't want it up
full-time. A vest to reinforce the protection over my vital
organs. A small white earpiece that attaches to my collar by
a wire. Beetee secures a mask to my belt that I don't have
to wear unless there's a gas attack. "If you see anyone
dropping for reasons you can't explain, put it on
immediately," he says. Finally, he straps a sheath divided
into three cylinders of arrows to my back. "Just remember:
Right side, fire. Left side, explosive. Center, regular. You
shouldn't need them, but better safe than sorry."
Boggs shows up to escort me down to the Airborne
Division. Just as the elevator arrives, Finnick appears in a
state of agitation. "Katniss, they won't let me go! I told them
I'm fine, but they won't even let me ride in the hovercraft!"
I take in Finnick--his bare legs showing between his
hospital gown and slippers, his tangle of hair, the halfknotted
rope twisted around his fingers, the wild look in his
eyes--and know any plea on my part will be useless. Even I
don't think it's a good idea to bring him. So I smack my
hand on my forehead and say, "Oh, I forgot. It's this stupid
concussion. I was supposed to tell you to report to Beetee
in Special Weaponry. He's designed a new trident for you."
At the word trident, it's as if the old Finnick surfaces.
"Really? What's it do?"
"I don't know. But if it's anything like my bow and
arrows, you're going to love it," I say. "You'll need to train
with it, though."
"Right. Of course. I guess I better get down there," he
says.
"Finnick?" I say. "Maybe some pants?"
He looks down at his legs as if noticing his outfit for the
first time. Then he whips off his hospital gown, leaving him
in just his underwear. "Why? Do you find this"--he strikes a
ridiculously provocative pose--"distracting?"
I can't help laughing because it's funny, and it's extra
funny because it makes Boggs look so uncomfortable, and
I'm happy because Finnick actually sounds like the guy I
met at the Quarter Quell.
"I'm only human, Odair." I get in before the elevator
doors close. "Sorry," I say to Boggs.
"Don't be. I thought you...handled that well," he says.
"Better than my having to arrest him, anyway."
"Yeah," I say. I sneak a sidelong glance at him. He's
probably in his mid-forties, with close-cropped gray hair
and blue eyes. Incredible posture. He's spoken out twice
today in ways that make me think he would rather be
friends than enemies. Maybe I should give him a chance.
But he just seems so in step with Coin....
There's a series of loud clicks. The elevator comes to
a slight pause and then begins to move laterally to the left.
"It goes sideways?" I ask.
"Yes. There's a whole network of elevator paths under
Thirteen," he answers. "This one lies just above the
transport spoke to the fifth airlift platform. It's taking us to
the Hangar."
The Hangar. The dungeons. Special Defense.
Somewhere food is grown. Power generated. Air and
water purified. "Thirteen is even larger than I thought."
"Can't take credit for much of it," says Boggs. "We
basically inherited the place. It's been all we can do to keep
it running."
The clicks resume. We drop down again briefly--just a
couple of levels--and the doors open on the Hangar.
"Oh," I let out involuntarily at the sight of the fleet. Row
after row of different kinds of hovercraft. "Did you inherit
these, too?"
"Some we manufactured. Some were part of the
Capitol's air force. They've been updated, of course," says
Boggs.
I feel that twinge of hatred against 13 again. "So, you
had all this, and you left the rest of the districts defenseless
against the Capitol."
"It's not that simple," he shoots back. "We were in no
position to launch a counterattack until recently. We could
barely stay alive. After we'd overthrown and executed the
Capitol's people, only a handful of us even knew how to
pilot. We could've nuked them with missiles, yes. But
there's always the larger question: If we engage in that type
of war with the Capitol, would there be any human life left?"
"That sounds like what Peeta said. And you all called
him a traitor," I counter.
"Because he called for a cease-fire," says Boggs.
"You'll notice neither side has launched nuclear weapons.
We're working it out the old-fashioned way. Over here,
Soldier Everdeen." He indicates one of the smaller
hovercraft.
I mount the stairs and find it packed with the television
crew and equipment. Everyone else is dressed in 13's dark
gray military jumpsuits, even Haymitch, although he seems
unhappy about the snugness of his collar.
Fulvia Cardew hustles over and makes a sound of
frustration when she sees my clean face. "All that work,
down the drain. I'm not blaming you, Katniss. It's just that
very few people are born with camera-ready faces. Like
him." She snags Gale, who's in a conversation with
Plutarch, and spins him toward us. "Isn't he handsome?"
Gale does look striking in the uniform, I guess. But the
question just embarrasses us both, given our history. I'm
trying to think of a witty comeback, when Boggs says
brusquely, "Well, don't expect us to be too impressed. We
just saw Finnick Odair in his underwear." I decide to go
ahead and like Boggs.
There's a warning of the upcoming takeoff and I strap
myself into a seat next to Gale, facing off with Haymitch and
Plutarch. We glide through a maze of tunnels that opens out
onto a platform. Some sort of elevator device lifts the craft
slowly up through the levels. All at once we're outside in a
large field surrounded by woods, then we rise off the
platform and become wrapped in clouds.
Now that the flurry of activity leading up to this mission
is over, I realize I have no idea what I'm facing on this trip to
District 8. In fact, I know very little about the actual state of
the war. Or what it would take to win it. Or what would
happen if we did.
Plutarch tries to lay it out in simple terms for me. First
of all, every district is currently at war with the Capitol
except 2, which has always had a favored relationship with
our enemies despite its participation in the Hunger Games.
They get more food and better living conditions. After the
Dark Days and the supposed destruction of 13, District 2
became the Capitol's new center of defense, although it's
publicly presented as the home of the nation's stone
quarries, in the same way that 13 was known for graphite
mining. District 2 not only manufactures weaponry, it trains
and even supplies Peacekeepers.
"You mean...some of the Peacekeepers are born in
Two?" I ask. "I thought they all came from the Capitol."
Plutarch nods. "That's what you're supposed to think.
And some do come from the Capitol. But its population
could never sustain a force that size. Then there's the
problem of recruiting Capitol-raised citizens for a dull life of
deprivation in the districts. A twenty-year commitment to the
Peacekeepers, no marriage, no children allowed. Some
buy into it for the honor of the thing, others take it on as an
alternative to punishment. For instance, join the
Peacekeepers and your debts are forgiven. Many people
are swamped in debt in the Capitol, but not all of them are
fit for military duty. So District Two is where we turn for
additional troops. It's a way for their people to escape
poverty and a life in the quarries. They're raised with a
warrior mind-set. You've seen how eager their children are
to volunteer to be tributes."
Cato and Clove. Brutus and Enobaria. I've seen their
eagerness and their bloodlust, too. "But all the other
districts are on our side?" I ask.
"Yes. Our goal is to take over the districts one by one,
ending with District Two, thus cutting off the Capitol's supply
chain. Then, once it's weakened, we invade the Capitol
itself," says Plutarch. "That will be a whole other type of
challenge. But we'll cross that bridge when we come to it."
"If we win, who would be in charge of the government?"
Gale asks.
"Everyone," Plutarch tells him. "We're going to form a
republic where the people of each district and the Capitol
can elect their own representatives to be their voice in a
centralized government. Don't look so suspicious; it's
worked before."
"In books," Haymitch mutters.
"In history books," says Plutarch. "And if our ancestors
could do it, then we can, too."
Frankly, our ancestors don't seem much to brag about.
I mean, look at the state they left us in, with the wars and the
broken planet. Clearly, they didn't care about what would
happen to the people who came after them. But this
republic idea sounds like an improvement over our current
government.
"And if we lose?" I ask.
"If we lose?" Plutarch looks out at the clouds, and an
ironic smile twists his lips. "Then I would expect next year's
Hunger Games to be quite unforgettable. That reminds
me." He takes a vial from his vest, shakes a few deep violet
pills into his hand, and holds them out to us. "We named
them nightlock in your honor, Katniss. The rebels can't
afford for any of us to be captured now. But I promise, it will
be completely painless."
I take hold of a capsule, unsure of where to put it.
Plutarch taps a spot on my shoulder at the front of my left
sleeve. I examine it and find a tiny pocket that both secures
and conceals the pill. Even if my hands were tied, I could
lean my head forward and bite it free.
Cinna, it seems, has thought of everything.
7
The hovercraft makes a quick, spiral descent onto a
wide road on the outskirts of 8. Almost immediately, the
door opens, the stairs slide into place, and we're spit out
onto the asphalt. The moment the last person disembarks,
the equipment retracts. Then the craft lifts off and vanishes.
I'm left with a bodyguard made up of Gale, Boggs, and two
other soldiers. The TV crew consists of a pair of burly
Capitol cameramen with heavy mobile cameras encasing
their bodies like insect shells, a woman director named
Cressida who has a shaved head tattooed with green
vines, and her assistant, Messalla, a slim young man with
several sets of earrings. On careful observation, I see his
tongue has been pierced, too, and he wears a stud with a
silver ball the size of a marble.
Boggs hustles us off the road toward a row of
warehouses as a second hovercraft comes in for a landing.
This one brings crates of medical supplies and a crew of
six medics--I can tell by their distinctive white outfits. We all
follow Boggs down an alley that runs between two dull gray
warehouses. Only the occasional access ladder to the roof
interrupts the scarred metal walls. When we emerge onto
the street, it's like we've entered another world.
The wounded from this morning's bombing are being
brought in. On homemade stretchers, in wheelbarrows, on
carts, slung across shoulders, and clenched tight in arms.
Bleeding, limbless, unconscious. Propelled by desperate
people to a warehouse with a sloppily painted H above the
doorway. It's a scene from my old kitchen, where my mother
treated the dying, multiplied by ten, by fifty, by a hundred. I
had expected bombed-out buildings and instead find
myself confronted with broken human bodies.
This is where they plan on filming me? I turn to Boggs.
"This won't work," I say. "I won't be good here."
He must see the panic in my eyes, because he stops a
moment and places his hands on my shoulders. "You will.
Just let them see you. That will do more for them than any
doctor in the world could."
A woman directing the incoming patients catches sight
of us, does a sort of double take, and then strides over. Her
dark brown eyes are puffy with fatigue and she smells of
metal and sweat. A bandage around her throat needed
changing about three days ago. The strap of the automatic
weapon slung across her back digs into her neck and she
shifts her shoulder to reposition it. With a jerk of her thumb,
she orders the medics into the warehouse. They comply
without question.
"This is Commander Paylor of Eight," says Boggs.
"Commander, Soldier Katniss Everdeen."
She looks young to be a commander. Early thirties.
But there's an authoritative tone to her voice that makes you
feel her appointment wasn't arbitrary. Beside her, in my
spanking-new outfit, scrubbed and shiny, I feel like a
recently hatched chick, untested and only just learning how
to navigate the world.
"Yeah, I know who she is," says Paylor. "You're alive,
then. We weren't sure." Am I wrong or is there a note of
accusation in her voice?
"I'm still not sure myself," I answer.
"Been in recovery." Boggs taps his head. "Bad
concussion." He lowers his voice a moment. "Miscarriage.
But she insisted on coming by to see your wounded."
"Well, we've got plenty of those," says Paylor.
"You think this is a good idea?" says Gale, frowning at
the hospital. "Assembling your wounded like this?"
I don't. Any sort of contagious disease would spread
through this place like wildfire.
"I think it's slightly better than leaving them to die," says
Paylor.
"That's not what I meant," Gale tells her.
"Well, currently that's my other option. But if you come
up with a third and get Coin to back it, I'm all ears." Paylor
waves me toward the door. "Come on in, Mockingjay. And
by all means, bring your friends."
I glance back at the freak show that is my crew, steel
myself, and follow her into the hospital. Some sort of heavy,
industrial curtain hangs the length of the building, forming a
sizable corridor. Corpses lie side by side, curtain brushing
their heads, white cloths concealing their faces. "We've got
a mass grave started a few blocks west of here, but I can't
spare the manpower to move them yet," says Paylor. She
finds a slit in the curtain and opens it wide.
My fingers wrap around Gale's wrist. "Do not leave my
side," I say under my breath.
"I'm right here," he answers quietly.
I step through the curtain and my senses are
assaulted. My first impulse is to cover my nose to block out
the stench of soiled linen, putrefying flesh, and vomit, all
ripening in the heat of the warehouse. They've propped
open skylights that crisscross the high metal roof, but any
air that's managing to get in can't make a dent in the fog
below. The thin shafts of sunlight provide the only
illumination, and as my eyes adjust, I can make out row
upon row of wounded, in cots, on pallets, on the floor
because there are so many to claim the space. The drone
of black flies, the moaning of people in pain, and the sobs
of their attending loved ones have combined into a
wrenching chorus.
We have no real hospitals in the districts. We die at
home, which at the moment seems a far desirable
alternative to what lies in front of me. Then I remember that
many of these people probably lost their homes in the
bombings.
Sweat begins to run down my back, fill my palms. I
breathe through my mouth in an attempt to diminish the
smell. Black spots swim across my field of vision, and I
think there's a really good chance I could faint. But then I
catch sight of Paylor, who's watching me so closely, waiting
to see what I am made of, and if any of them have been
right to think they can count on me. So I let go of Gale and
force myself to move deeper into the warehouse, to walk
into the narrow strip between two rows of beds.
"Katniss?" a voice croaks out from my left, breaking
apart from the general din. "Katniss?" A hand reaches for
me out of the haze. I cling to it for support. Attached to the
hand is a young woman with an injured leg. Blood has
seeped through the heavy bandages, which are crawling
with flies. Her face reflects her pain, but something else,
too, something that seems completely incongruous with her
situation. "Is it really you?"
"Yeah, it's me," I get out.
Joy. That's the expression on her face. At the sound of
my voice, it brightens, erases the suffering momentarily.
"You're alive! We didn't know. People said you were,
but we didn't know!" she says excitedly.
"I got pretty banged up. But I got better," I say. "Just
like you will."
"I've got to tell my brother!" The woman struggles to sit
up and calls to someone a few beds down. "Eddy! Eddy!
She's here! It's Katniss Everdeen!"
A boy, probably about twelve years old, turns to us.
Bandages obscure half of his face. The side of his mouth I
can see opens as if to utter an exclamation. I go to him,
push his damp brown curls back from his forehead. Murmur
a greeting. He can't speak, but his one good eye fixes on
me with such intensity, as if he's trying to memorize every
detail of my face.
I hear my name rippling through the hot air, spreading
out into the hospital. "Katniss! Katniss Everdeen!" The
sounds of pain and grief begin to recede, to be replaced by
words of anticipation. From all sides, voices beckon me. I
begin to move, clasping the hands extended to me,
touching the sound parts of those unable to move their
limbs, saying hello, how are you, good to meet you. Nothing
of importance, no amazing words of inspiration. But it
doesn't matter. Boggs is right. It's the sight of me, alive, that
is the inspiration.
Hungry fingers devour me, wanting to feel my flesh. As
a stricken man clutches my face between his hands, I send
a silent thank-you to Dalton for suggesting I wash off the
makeup. How ridiculous, how perverse I would feel
presenting that painted Capitol mask to these people. The
damage, the fatigue, the imperfections. That's how they
recognize me, why I belong to them.
Despite his controversial interview with Caesar, many
ask about Peeta, assure me that they know he was
speaking under duress. I do my best to sound positive
about our future, but people are truly devastated when they
learn I've lost the baby. I want to come clean and tell one
weeping woman that it was all a hoax, a move in the game,
but to present Peeta as a liar now would not help his
image. Or mine. Or the cause.
I begin to fully understand the lengths to which people
have gone to protect me. What I mean to the rebels. My
ongoing struggle against the Capitol, which has so often felt
like a solitary journey, has not been undertaken alone. I
have had thousands upon thousands of people from the
districts at my side. I was their Mockingjay long before I
accepted the role.
A new sensation begins to germinate inside me. But it
takes until I am standing on a table, waving my final
goodbyes to the hoarse chanting of my name, to define it.
Power. I have a kind of power I never knew I possessed.
Snow knew it, as soon as I held out those berries. Plutarch
knew when he rescued me from the arena. And Coin knows
now. So much so that she must publicly remind her people
that I am not in control.
When we're outside again, I lean against the
warehouse, catching my breath, accepting the canteen of
water from Boggs. "You did great," he says.
Well, I didn't faint or throw up or run out screaming.
Mostly, I just rode the wave of emotion rolling through the
place.
"We got some nice stuff in there," says Cressida. I
look at the insect cameramen, perspiration pouring from
under their equipment. Messalla scribbling notes. I had
forgotten they were even filming me.
"I didn't do much, really," I say.
"You have to give yourself some credit for what you've
done in the past," says Boggs.
What I've done in the past? I think of the trail of
destruction in my wake--my knees weaken and I slide down
to a sitting position. "That's a mixed bag."
"Well, you're not perfect by a long shot. But times
being what they are, you'll have to do," says Boggs.
Gale squats down beside me, shaking his head. "I
can't believe you let all those people touch you. I kept
expecting you to make a break for the door."
"Shut up," I say with a laugh.
"Your mother's going to be very proud when she sees
the footage," he says.
"My mother won't even notice me. She'll be too
appalled by the conditions in there." I turn to Boggs and
ask, "Is it like this in every district?"
"Yes. Most are under attack. We're trying to get in aid
wherever we can, but it's not enough." He stops a minute,
distracted by something in his earpiece. I realize I haven't
heard Haymitch's voice once, and fiddle with mine,
wondering if it's broken. "We're to get to the airstrip.
Immediately," Boggs says, lifting me to my feet with one
hand. "There's a problem."
"What kind of problem?" asks Gale.
"Incoming bombers," says Boggs. He reaches behind
my neck and yanks Cinna's helmet up onto my head. "Let's
move!"
Unsure of what's going on, I take off running along the
front of the warehouse, heading for the alley that leads to
the airstrip. But I don't sense any immediate threat. The
sky's an empty, cloudless blue. The street's clear except for
the people hauling the wounded to the hospital. There's no
enemy, no alarm. Then the sirens begin to wail. Within
seconds, a low-flying V-shaped formation of Capitol
hoverplanes appears above us, and the bombs begin to
fall. I'm blown off my feet, into the front wall of the
warehouse. There's a searing pain just above the back of
my right knee. Something has struck my back as well, but
doesn't seem to have penetrated my vest. I try to get up, but
Boggs pushes me back down, shielding my body with his
own. The ground ripples under me as bomb after bomb
drops from the planes and detonates.
It's a horrifying sensation being pinned against the wall
as the bombs rain down. What was that expression my
father used for easy kills? Like shooting fish in a barrel.
We are the fish, the street the barrel.
"Katniss!" I'm startled by Haymitch's voice in my ear.
"What? Yes, what? I'm here!" I answer.
"Listen to me. We can't land during the bombing, but
it's imperative you're not spotted," he says.
"So they don't know I'm here?" I assumed, as usual, it
was my presence that brought on punishment.
"Intelligence thinks no. That this raid was already
scheduled," says Haymitch.
Now Plutarch's voice comes up, calm but forceful. The
voice of a Head Gamemaker used to calling the shots
under pressure. "There's a light blue warehouse three down
from you. It has a bunker in the far north corner. Can you get
there?"
"We'll do our best," says Boggs. Plutarch must be in
everyone's ear, because my bodyguards and crew are
getting up. My eye instinctively searches for Gale and sees
he's on his feet, apparently unharmed.
"You've got maybe forty-five seconds to the next
wave," says Plutarch.
I give a grunt of pain as my right leg takes the weight of
my body, but I keep moving. No time to examine the injury.
Better not to look now, anyway. Fortunately, I have on shoes
that Cinna designed. They grip the asphalt on contact and
spring free of it on release. I'd be hopeless in that ill-fitting
pair that 13 assigned to me. Boggs has the lead, but no
one else passes me. Instead they match my pace,
protecting my sides, my back. I force myself into a sprint as
the seconds tick away. We pass the second gray
warehouse and run along a dirt brown building. Up ahead, I
see a faded blue facade. Home of the bunker. We have just
reached another alley, need only to cross it to arrive at the
door, when the next wave of bombs begins. I instinctively
dive into the alley and roll toward the blue wall. This time it's
Gale who throws himself over me to provide one more layer
of protection from the bombing. It seems to go on longer
this time, but we are farther away.
I shift onto my side and find myself looking directly into
Gale's eyes. For an instant the world recedes and there is
just his flushed face, his pulse visible at his temple, his lips
slightly parted as he tries to catch his breath.
"You all right?" he asks, his words nearly drowned out
by an explosion.
"Yeah. I don't think they've seen me," I answer. "I mean,
they're not following us."
"No, they've targeted something else," says Gale.
"I know, but there's nothing back there but--" The
realization hits us at the same time.
"The hospital." Instantly, Gale's up and shouting to the
others. "They're targeting the hospital!"
"Not your problem," says Plutarch firmly. "Get to the
bunker."
"But there's nothing there but the wounded!" I say.
"Katniss." I hear the warning note in Haymitch's voice
and know what's coming. "Don't you even think about--!" I
yank the earpiece free and let it hang from its wire. With
that distraction gone, I hear another sound. Machine gun
fire coming from the roof of the dirt brown warehouse
across the alley. Someone is returning fire. Before anyone
can stop me, I make a dash for an access ladder and begin
to scale it. Climbing. One of the things I do best.
"Don't stop!" I hear Gale say behind me. Then there's
the sound of his boot on someone's face. If it belongs to
Boggs, Gale's going to pay for it dearly later on. I make the
roof and drag myself onto the tar. I stop long enough to pull
Gale up beside me, and then we take off for the row of
machine gun nests on the street side of the warehouse.
Each looks to be manned by a few rebels. We skid into a
nest with a pair of soldiers, hunching down behind the
barrier.
"Boggs know you're up here?" To my left I see Paylor
behind one of the guns, looking at us quizzically.
I try to be evasive without flat-out lying. "He knows
where we are, all right."
Paylor laughs. "I bet he does. You been trained in
these?" She slaps the stock of her gun.
"I have. In Thirteen," says Gale. "But I'd rather use my
own weapons."
"Yes, we've got our bows." I hold mine up, then realize
how decorative it must seem. "It's more deadly than it
looks."
"It would have to be," says Paylor. "All right. We expect
at least three more waves. They have to drop their sight
shields before they release the bombs. That's our chance.
Stay low!" I position myself to shoot from one knee.
"Better start with fire," says Gale.
I nod and pull an arrow from my right sheath. If we miss
our targets, these arrows will land somewhere--probably
the warehouses across the street. A fire can be put out, but
the damage an explosive can do may be irreparable.
Suddenly, they appear in the sky, two blocks down,
maybe a hundred yards above us. Seven small bombers in
a V formation. "Geese!" I yell at Gale. He'll know exactly
what I mean. During migration season, when we hunt fowl,
we've developed a system of dividing the birds so we don't
both target the same ones. I get the far side of the V, Gale
takes the near, and we alternate shots at the front bird.
There's no time for further discussion. I estimate the lead
time on the hoverplanes and let my arrow fly. I catch the
inside wing of one, causing it to burst into flames. Gale just
misses the point plane. A fire blooms on an empty
warehouse roof across from us. He swears under his
breath.
The hoverplane I hit swerves out of formation, but still
releases its bombs. It doesn't disappear, though. Neither
does one other I assume was hit by gunfire. The damage
must prevent the sight shield from reactivating.
"Good shot," says Gale.
"I wasn't even aiming for that one," I mutter. I'd set my
sights on the plane in front of it. "They're faster than we
think."
"Positions!" Paylor shouts. The next wave of
hoverplanes is appearing already.
"Fire's no good," Gale says. I nod and we both load
explosive-tipped arrows. Those warehouses across the
way look deserted anyway.
As the planes sweep silently in, I make another
decision. "I'm standing!" I shout to Gale, and rise to my feet.
This is the position I get the best accuracy from. I lead
earlier and score a direct hit on the point plane, blasting a
hole in its belly. Gale blows the tail off a second. It flips and
crashes into the street, setting off a series of explosions as
its cargo goes off.
Without warning, a third V formation unveils. This time,
Gale squarely hits the point plane. I take the wing off the
second bomber, causing it to spin into the one behind it.
Together they collide into the roof of the warehouse across
from the hospital. A fourth goes down from gunfire.
"All right, that's it," Paylor says.
Flames and heavy black smoke from the wreckage
obscure our view. "Did they hit the hospital?"
"Must have," she says grimly.
As I hurry toward the ladders at the far end of the
warehouse, the sight of Messalla and one of the insects
emerging from behind an air duct surprises me. I thought
they'd still be hunkered down in the alley.
"They're growing on me," says Gale.
I scramble down a ladder. When my feet hit the ground,
I find a bodyguard, Cressida, and the other insect waiting. I
expect resistance, but Cressida just waves me toward the
hospital. She's yelling, "I don't care, Plutarch! Just give me
five more minutes!" Not one to question a free pass, I take
off into the street.
"Oh, no," I whisper as I catch sight of the hospital. What
used to be the hospital. I move past the wounded, past the
burning plane wrecks, fixated on the disaster ahead of me.
People screaming, running about frantically, but unable to
help. The bombs have collapsed the hospital roof and set
the building on fire, effectively trapping the patients within.
A group of rescuers has assembled, trying to clear a path
to the inside. But I already know what they will find. If the
crushing debris and the flames didn't get them, the smoke
did.
Gale's at my shoulder. The fact that he does nothing
only confirms my suspicions. Miners don't abandon an
accident until it's hopeless.
"Come on, Katniss. Haymitch says they can get a
hovercraft in for us now," he tells me. But I can't seem to
move.
"Why would they do that? Why would they target
people who were already dying?" I ask him.
"Scare others off. Prevent the wounded from seeking
help," says Gale. "Those people you met, they were
expendable. To Snow, anyway. If the Capitol wins, what will
it do with a bunch of damaged slaves?"
I remember all those years in the woods, listening to
Gale rant against the Capitol. Me, not paying close
attention. Wondering why he even bothered to dissect its
motives. Why thinking like our enemy would ever matter.
Clearly, it could have mattered today. When Gale
questioned the existence of the hospital, he was not
thinking of disease, but this. Because he never
underestimates the cruelty of those we face.
I slowly turn my back to the hospital and find Cressida,
flanked by the insects, standing a couple of yards in front of
me. Her manner's unrattled. Cool even. "Katniss," she says,
"President Snow just had them air the bombing live. Then
he made an appearance to say that this was his way of
sending a message to the rebels. What about you? Would
you like to tell the rebels anything?"
"Yes," I whisper. The red blinking light on one of the
cameras catches my eye. I know I'm being recorded. "Yes,"
I say more forcefully. Everyone is drawing away from me--
Gale, Cressida, the insects--giving me the stage. But I stay
focused on the red light. "I want to tell the rebels that I am
alive. That I'm right here in District Eight, where the Capitol
has just bombed a hospital full of unarmed men, women,
and children. There will be no survivors." The shock I've
been feeling begins to give way to fury. "I want to tell people
that if you think for one second the Capitol will treat us fairly
if there's a cease-fire, you're deluding yourself. Because
you know who they are and what they do." My hands go out
automatically, as if to indicate the whole horror around me.
"This is what they do! And we must fight back!"
I'm moving in toward the camera now, carried forward
by my rage. "President Snow says he's sending us a
message? Well, I have one for him. You can torture us and
bomb us and burn our districts to the ground, but do you
see that?" One of the cameras follows as I point to the
planes burning on the roof of the warehouse across from
us. The Capitol seal on a wing glows clearly through the
flames. "Fire is catching!" I am shouting now, determined
that he will not miss a word. "And if we burn, you burn with
us!"
My last words hang in the air. I feel suspended in time.
Held aloft in a cloud of heat that generates not from my
surroundings, but from my own being.
"Cut!" Cressida's voice snaps me back to reality,
extinguishes me. She gives me a nod of approval. "That's a
wrap."
8
Boggs appears and gets a firm lock on my arm, but I'm
not planning on running now. I look over at the hospital--just
in time to see the rest of the structure give way--and the
fight goes out of me. All those people, the hundreds of
wounded, the relatives, the medics from 13, are no more. I
turn back to Boggs, see the swelling on his face left by
Gale's boot. I'm no expert, but I'm pretty sure his nose is
broken. His voice is more resigned than angry, though.
"Back to the landing strip." I obediently take a step forward
and wince as I become aware of the pain behind my right
knee. The adrenaline rush that overrode the sensation has
passed and my body parts join in a chorus of complaints.
I'm banged up and bloody and someone seems to be
hammering on my left temple from inside my skull. Boggs
quickly examines my face, then scoops me up and jogs for
the runway. Halfway there, I puke on his bulletproof vest. It's
hard to tell because he's short of breath, but I think he sighs.
A small hovercraft, different from the one that
transported us here, waits on the runway. The second my
team's on board, we take off. No comfy seats and windows
this time. We seem to be in some sort of cargo craft.
Boggs does emergency first aid on people to hold them
until we get back to 13. I want to take off my vest, since I got
a fair amount of vomit on it as well, but it's too cold to think
about it. I lie on the floor with my head in Gale's lap. The last
thing I remember is Boggs spreading a couple of burlap
sacks over me.
When I wake up, I'm warm and patched up in my old
bed in the hospital. My mother's there, checking my vital
signs. "How do you feel?"
"A little beat-up, but all right," I say.
"No one even told us you were going until you were
gone," she says.
I feel a pang of guilt. When your family's had to send
you off twice to the Hunger Games, this isn't the kind of
detail you should overlook. "I'm sorry. They weren't
expecting the attack. I was just supposed to be visiting the
patients," I explain. "Next time, I'll have them clear it with
you."
"Katniss, no one clears anything with me," she says.
It's true. Even I don't. Not since my father died. Why
pretend? "Well, I'll have them...notify you anyway."
On the bedside table is a piece of shrapnel they
removed from my leg. The doctors are more concerned
with the damage my brain might have suffered from the
explosions, since my concussion hadn't fully healed to
begin with. But I don't have double vision or anything and I
can think clearly enough. I've slept right through the late
afternoon and night, and I'm starving. My breakfast is
disappointingly small. Just a few cubes of bread soaking in
warm milk. I've been called down to an early morning
meeting at Command. I start to get up and then realize they
plan to roll my hospital bed directly there. I want to walk, but
that's out, so I negotiate my way into a wheelchair. I feel
fine, really. Except for my head, and my leg, and the
soreness from the bruises, and the nausea that hit a couple
minutes after I ate. Maybe the wheelchair's a good idea.
As they wheel me down, I begin to get uneasy about
what I will face. Gale and I directly disobeyed orders
yesterday, and Boggs has the injury to prove it. Surely,
there will be repercussions, but will they go so far as Coin
annulling our agreement for the victors' immunity? Have I
stripped Peeta of what little protection I could give him?
When I get to Command, the only ones who've arrived
are Cressida, Messalla, and the insects. Messalla beams
and says, "There's our little star!" and the others are smiling
so genuinely that I can't help but smile in return. They
impressed me in 8, following me onto the roof during the
bombing, making Plutarch back off so they could get the
footage they wanted. They more than do their work, they
take pride in it. Like Cinna.
I have a strange thought that if we were in the arena
together, I would pick them as allies. Cressida, Messalla,
and--and--"I have to stop calling you 'the insects,'" I blurt out
to the cameramen. I explain how I didn't know their names,
but their suits suggested the shelled creatures. The
comparison doesn't seem to bother them. Even without the
camera shells, they strongly resemble each other. Same
sandy hair, red beards, and blue eyes. The one with closebitten
nails introduces himself as Castor and the other,
who's his brother, as Pollux. I wait for Pollux to say hello, but
he just nods. At first I think he's shy or a man of few words.
But something tugs on me--the position of his lips, the extra
effort he takes to swallow--and I know before Castor tells
me. Pollux is an Avox. They have cut out his tongue and he
will never speak again. And I no longer have to wonder
what made him risk everything to help bring down the
Capitol.
As the room fills, I brace myself for a less congenial
reception. But the only people who register any kind of
negativity are Haymitch, who's always out of sorts, and a
sour-faced Fulvia Cardew. Boggs wears a flesh-colored
plastic mask from his upper lip to his brow--I was right
about the broken nose--so his expression's hard to read.
Coin and Gale are in the midst of some exchange that
seems positively chummy.
When Gale slides into the seat next to my wheelchair, I
say, "Making new friends?"
His eyes flicker to the president and back. "Well, one
of us has to be accessible." He touches my temple gently.
"How do you feel?"
They must have served stewed garlic and squash for
the breakfast vegetable. The more people who gather, the
stronger the fumes are. My stomach turns and the lights
suddenly seem too bright. "Kind of rocky," I say. "How are
you?"
"Fine. They dug out a couple of pieces of shrapnel. No
big deal," he says.
Coin calls the meeting to order. "Our Airtime Assault
has officially launched. For any of you who missed
yesterday's twenty-hundred broadcast of our first propo--or
the seventeen reruns Beetee has managed to air since--we
will begin by replaying it." Replaying it? So they not only got
usable footage, they've already slapped together a propo
and aired it repeatedly. My palms grow moist in
anticipation of seeing myself on television. What if I'm still
awful? What if I'm as stiff and pointless as I was in the
studio and they've just given up on getting anything better?
Individual screens slide up from the table, the lights dim
slightly, and a hush falls over the room.
At first, my screen is black. Then a tiny spark flickers in
the center. It blossoms, spreads, silently eating up the
blackness until the entire frame is ablaze with a fire so real
and intense, I imagine I feel the heat emanating from it. The
image of my mockingjay pin emerges, glowing red-gold.
The deep, resonant voice that haunts my dreams begins to
speak. Claudius Templesmith, the official announcer of the
Hunger Games, says, "Katniss Everdeen, the girl who was
on fire, burns on."
Suddenly, there I am, replacing the mockingjay,
standing before the real flames and smoke of District 8. "I
want to tell the rebels that I am alive. That I'm right here in
District Eight, where the Capitol has just bombed a
hospital full of unarmed men, women, and children. There
will be no survivors." Cut to the hospital collapsing in on
itself, the desperation of the onlookers as I continue in
voice-over. "I want to tell people that if you think for one
second the Capitol will treat us fairly if there's a cease-fire,
you're deluding yourself. Because you know who they are
and what they do." Back to me now, my hands lifting up to
indicate the outrage around me. "This is what they do! And
we must fight back!" Now comes a truly fantastic montage
of the battle. The initial bombs falling, us running, being
blown to the ground--a close-up of my wound, which looks
good and bloody--scaling the roof, diving into the nests,
and then some amazing shots of the rebels, Gale, and
mostly me, me, me knocking those planes out of the sky.
Smash-cut back to me moving in on the camera.
"President Snow says he's sending us a message? Well, I
have one for him. You can torture us and bomb us and
burn our districts to the ground, but do you see that?"
We're with the camera, tracking to the planes burning on
the roof of the warehouse. Tight on the Capitol seal on a
wing, which melts back into the image of my face, shouting
at the president. "Fire is catching! And if we burn, you burn
with us!" Flames engulf the screen again. Superimposed
on them in black, solid letters are the words:
IF WE BURN YOU
BURN WITH US
The words catch fire and the whole screen burns to
blackness.
There's a moment of silent relish, then applause
followed by demands to see it again. Coin indulgently hits
the replay button, and this time, since I know what will
happen, I try to pretend that I'm watching this on my
television at home in the Seam. An anti-Capitol statement.
There's never been anything like it on television. Not in my
lifetime, anyway.
By the time the screen burns to black a second time, I
need to know more. "Did it play all over Panem? Did they
see it in the Capitol?"
"Not in the Capitol," says Plutarch. "We couldn't
override their system, although Beetee's working on it. But
in all the districts. We even got it on in Two, which may be
more valuable than the Capitol at this point in the game."
"Is Claudius Templesmith with us?" I ask.
This gives Plutarch a good laugh. "Only his voice. But
that's ours for the taking. We didn't even have to do any
special editing. He said that actual line in your first Games."
He slaps his hand on the table. "What say we give another
round of applause to Cressida, her amazing team, and, of
course, our on-camera talent!"
I clap, too, until I realize I'm the on-camera talent and
maybe it's obnoxious that I'm applauding for myself, but no
one's paying attention. I can't help noticing the strain on
Fulvia's face, though. I think how hard this must be for her,
watching Haymitch's idea succeed under Cressida's
direction, when Fulvia's studio approach was such a flop.
Coin seems to have reached the end of her tolerance
for self-congratulation. "Yes, well deserved. The result is
more than we had hoped for. But I do have to question the
wide margin of risk that you were willing to operate within. I
know the raid was unforeseen. However, given the
circumstances, I think we should discuss the decision to
send Katniss into actual combat."
The decision? To send me into combat? Then she
doesn't know that I flagrantly disregarded orders, ripped out
my earpiece, and gave my bodyguards the slip? What else
have they kept from her?
"It was a tough call," says Plutarch, furrowing his brow.
"But the general consensus was that we weren't going to
get anything worth using if we locked her in a bunker
somewhere every time a gun went off."
"And you're all right with that?" asks the president.
Gale has to kick me under the table before I realize
that she's talking to me. "Oh! Yeah, I'm completely all right
with that. It felt good. Doing something for a change."
"Well, let's be just a little more judicious with her
exposure. Especially now that the Capitol knows what she
can do," says Coin. There's a rumble of assent from around
the table.
No one has ratted out Gale and me. Not Plutarch,
whose authority we ignored. Not Boggs with his broken
nose. Not the insects we led into fire. Not Haymitch--no,
wait a minute. Haymitch is giving me a deadly smile and
saying sweetly, "Yeah, we wouldn't want to lose our little
Mockingjay when she's finally begun to sing." I make a note
to myself not to end up alone in a room with him, because
he's clearly having vengeful thoughts over that stupid
earpiece.
"So, what else do you have planned?" asks the
president.
Plutarch nods to Cressida, who consults a clipboard.
"We have some terrific footage of Katniss at the hospital in
Eight. There should be another propo in that with the theme
'Because you know who they are and what they do.' We'll
focus on Katniss interacting with the patients, particularly
the children, the bombing of the hospital, and the wreckage.
Messalla's cutting that together. We're also thinking about a
Mockingjay piece. Highlight some of Katniss's best
moments intercut with scenes of rebel uprisings and war
footage. We call that one 'Fire is catching.' And then Fulvia
came up with a really brilliant idea."
Fulvia's mouthful-of-sour-grapes expression is startled
right off her face, but she recovers. "Well, I don't know how
brilliant it is, but I was thinking we could do a series of
propos called We Remember. In each one, we would
feature one of the dead tributes. Little Rue from Eleven or
old Mags from Four. The idea being that we could target
each district with a very personal piece."
"A tribute to your tributes, as it were," says Plutarch.
"That is brilliant, Fulvia," I say sincerely. "It's the perfect
way to remind people why they're fighting."
"I think it could work," she says. "I thought we might use
Finnick to intro and narrate the spots. If there was interest in
them."
"Frankly, I don't see how we could have too many We
Remember propos," says Coin. "Can you start producing
them today?"
"Of course," says Fulvia, obviously mollified by the
response to her idea.
Cressida has smoothed everything over in the creative
department with her gesture. Praised Fulvia for what is, in
fact, a really good idea, and cleared the way to continue her
own on-air depiction of the Mockingjay. What's interesting
is that Plutarch seems to have no need to share in the
credit. All he wants is for the Airtime Assault to work. I
remember that Plutarch is a Head Gamemaker, not a
member of the crew. Not a piece in the Games. Therefore,
his worth is not defined by a single element, but by the
overall success of the production. If we win the war, that's
when Plutarch will take his bow. And expect his reward.
The president sends everyone off to get to work, so
Gale wheels me back to the hospital. We laugh a little
about the cover-up. Gale says no one wanted to look bad
by admitting they couldn't control us. I'm kinder, saying they
probably didn't want to jeopardize the chance of taking us
out again now that they've gotten some decent footage.
Both things are probably true. Gale has to go meet Beetee
down in Special Weaponry, so I doze off.
It seems like I've only shut my eyes for a few minutes,
but when I open them, I flinch at the sight of Haymitch sitting
a couple of feet from my bed. Waiting. Possibly for several
hours if the clock is right. I think about hollering for a
witness, but I'm going to have to face him sooner or later.
Haymitch leans forward and dangles something on a
thin white wire in front of my nose. It's hard to focus on, but
I'm pretty sure what it is. He drops it to the sheets. "That is
your earpiece. I will give you exactly one more chance to
wear it. If you remove it from your ear again, I'll have you
fitted with this." He holds up some sort of metal headgear
that I instantly name the head shackle. "It's an alternative
audio unit that locks around your skull and under your chin
until it's opened with a key. And I'll have the only key. If for
some reason you're clever enough to disable it"--Haymitch
dumps the head shackle on the bed and whips out a tiny
silver chip--"I'll authorize them to surgically implant this
transmitter into your ear so that I may speak to you twentyfour
hours a day."
Haymitch in my head full-time. Horrifying. "I'll keep the
earpiece in," I mutter.
"Excuse me?" he says.
"I'll keep the earpiece in!" I say, loud enough to wake
up half the hospital.
"You sure? Because I'm equally happy with any of the
three options," he tells me.
"I'm sure," I say. I scrunch up the earpiece wire
protectively in my fist and fling the head shackle back in his
face with my free hand, but he catches it easily. Probably
was expecting me to throw it. "Anything else?"
Haymitch rises to go. "While I was waiting...I ate your
lunch." My eyes take in the empty stew bowl and tray on my
bed table. "I'm going to report you," I mumble into my pillow.
"You do that, sweetheart." He goes out, safe in the
knowledge that I'm not the reporting kind.
I want to go back to sleep, but I'm restless. Images
from yesterday begin to flood into the present. The
bombing, the fiery plane crashes, the faces of the wounded
who no longer exist. I imagine death from all sides. The last
moment before seeing a shell hit the ground, feeling the
wing blown from my plane and the dizzying nosedive into
oblivion, the warehouse roof falling down at me while I'm
pinned helplessly to my cot. Things I saw, in person or on
the tape. Things I caused with a pull of my bowstring.
Things I will never be able to erase from my memory.
At dinner, Finnick brings his tray to my bed so we can
watch the newest propo together on television. He was
assigned quarters on my old floor, but he has so many
mental relapses, he still basically lives in the hospital. The
rebels air the "Because you know who they are and what
they do" propo that Messalla edited. The footage is intercut
with short studio clips of Gale, Boggs, and Cressida
describing the incident. It's hard to watch my reception in
the hospital in 8 since I know what's coming. When the
bombs rain down on the roof, I bury my face in my pillow,
looking up again at a brief clip of me at the end, after all the
victims are dead.
At least Finnick doesn't applaud or act all happy when
it's done. He just says, "People should know that
happened. And now they do."
"Let's turn it off, Finnick, before they run it again," I urge
him. But as Finnick's hand moves toward the remote
control, I cry, "Wait!" The Capitol is introducing a special
segment and something about it looks familiar. Yes, it's
Caesar Flickerman. And I can guess who his guest will be.
Peeta's physical transformation shocks me. The
healthy, clear-eyed boy I saw a few days ago has lost at
least fifteen pounds and developed a nervous tremor in his
hands. They've still got him groomed. But underneath the
paint that cannot cover the bags under his eyes, and the
fine clothes that cannot conceal the pain he feels when he
moves, is a person badly damaged.
My mind reels, trying to make sense of it. I just saw
him! Four--no, five--I think it was five days ago. How has he
deteriorated so rapidly? What could they possibly have
done to him in such a short time? Then it hits me. I replay in
my mind as much as I can of his first interview with Caesar,
searching for anything that would place it in time. There is
nothing. They could have taped that interview a day or two
after I blew up the arena, then done whatever they wanted
to do to him ever since. "Oh, Peeta..." I whisper.
Caesar and Peeta have a few empty exchanges
before Caesar asks him about rumors that I'm taping
propos for the districts. "They're using her, obviously," says
Peeta. "To whip up the rebels. I doubt she even really
knows what's going on in the war. What's at stake."
"Is there anything you'd like to tell her?" asks Caesar.
"There is," says Peeta. He looks directly into the
camera, right into my eyes. "Don't be a fool, Katniss. Think
for yourself. They've turned you into a weapon that could be
instrumental in the destruction of humanity. If you've got any
real influence, use it to put the brakes on this thing. Use it to
stop the war before it's too late. Ask yourself, do you really
trust the people you're working with? Do you really know
what's going on? And if you don't...find out."
Black screen. Seal of Panem. Show over.
Finnick presses the button on the remote that kills the
power. In a minute, people will be here to do damage
control on Peeta's condition and the words that came out of
his mouth. I will need to repudiate them. But the truth is, I
don't trust the rebels or Plutarch or Coin. I'm not confident
that they tell me the truth. I won't be able to conceal this.
Footsteps are approaching.
Finnick grips me hard by the arms. "We didn't see it."
"What?" I ask.
"We didn't see Peeta. Only the propo on Eight. Then
we turned the set off because the images upset you. Got
it?" he asks. I nod. "Finish your dinner." I pull myself
together enough so that when Plutarch and Fulvia enter, I
have a mouthful of bread and cabbage. Finnick is talking
about how well Gale came across on camera. We
congratulate them on the propo. Make it clear it was so
powerful, we tuned out right afterward. They look relieved.
They believe us.
No one mentions Peeta.

EOS


Prologue
House of the Temple
8:33 P.M.
The secret is how to die.
Since the beginning of time, the secret had always been how to die.
The thirty-four-year-old initiate gazed down at the human skull cradled in his palms. The skull was hollow,
like a bowl, filled with bloodred wine.
Drink it, he told himself. You have nothing to fear.
As was tradition, he had begun this journey adorned in the ritualistic garb of a medieval heretic being led to
the gallows, his loose-fitting shirt gaping open to reveal his pale chest, his left pant leg rolled up to the knee,
and his right sleeve rolled up to the elbow. Around his neck hung a heavy rope noose—a “cable-tow” as the
brethren called it. Tonight, however, like the brethren bearing witness, he was dressed as a master.
The assembly of brothers encircling him all were adorned in their full regalia of lambskin aprons, sashes, and
white gloves. Around their necks hung ceremonial jewels that glistened like ghostly eyes in the muted light.
Many of these men held powerful stations in life, and yet the initiate knew their worldly ranks meant nothing
within these walls. Here all men were equals, sworn brothers sharing a mystical bond.
As he surveyed the daunting assembly, the initiate wondered who on the outside would ever believe that this
collection of men would assemble in one place . . . much less this place. The room looked like a holy
sanctuary from the ancient world.
The truth, however, was stranger still.
I am just blocks away from the White House.
This colossal edifice, located at 1733 Sixteenth Street NW in Washington, D.C., was a replica of a pre-
Christian temple—the temple of King Mausolus, the original mausoleum . . . a place to be taken after death.
Outside the main entrance, two seventeen-ton sphinxes guarded the bronze doors. The interior was an ornate
labyrinth of ritualistic chambers, halls, sealed vaults, libraries, and even a hollow wall that held the remains
of two human bodies. The initiate had been told every room in this building held a secret, and yet he knew no
room held deeper secrets than the gigantic chamber in which he was currently kneeling with a skull cradled
in his palms.
The Temple Room.
This room was a perfect square. And cavernous. The ceiling soared an astonishing one hundred feet
overhead, supported by monolithic columns of green granite. A tiered gallery of dark Russian walnut seats
with hand-tooled pigskin encircled the room. A thirty-three-foot-tall throne dominated the western wall, with
a concealed pipe organ opposite it. The walls were a kaleidoscope of ancient symbols . . . Egyptian, Hebraic,
astronomical, alchemical, and others yet unknown.
Tonight, the Temple Room was lit by a series of precisely arranged candles. Their dim glow was aided only
by a pale shaft of moonlight that filtered down through the expansive oculus in the ceiling and illuminated
the room's most startling feature—an enormous altar hewn from a solid block of polished Belgian black
marble, situated dead center of the square chamber.
The secret is how to die, the initiate reminded himself.
“It is time,” a voice whispered.
The initiate let his gaze climb the distinguished white-robed figure standing before him. The Supreme
Worshipful Master. The man, in his late fifties, was an American icon, well loved, robust, and incalculably
wealthy. His once-dark hair was turning silver, and his famous visage reflected a lifetime of power and a
vigorous intellect.
“Take the oath,” the Worshipful Master said, his voice soft like falling snow. “Complete your journey.”
The initiate's journey, like all such journeys, had begun at the first degree. On that night, in a ritual similar to
this one, the Worshipful Master had blindfolded him with a velvet hoodwink and pressed a ceremonial
dagger to his bare chest, demanding: “Do you seriously declare on your honor, uninfluenced by mercenary or
any other unworthy motive, that you freely and voluntarily offer yourself as a candidate for the mysteries and
privileges of this brotherhood?”
“I do,” the initiate had lied.
“Then let this be a sting to your consciousness,” the master had warned him, “as well as instant death should
you ever betray the secrets to be imparted to you.”
At the time, the initiate had felt no fear. They will never know my true purpose here.
Tonight, however, he sensed a foreboding solemnity in the Temple Room, and his mind began replaying all
the dire warnings he had been given on his journey, threats of terrible consequences if he ever shared the
ancient secrets he was about to learn: Throat cut from ear to ear . . . tongue torn out by its roots . . . bowels
taken out and burned . . . scattered to the four winds of heaven . . . heart plucked out and given to the beasts
of the field—
“Brother,” the gray-eyed master said, placing his left hand on the initiate's shoulder. “Take the final oath.”
Steeling himself for the last step of his journey, the initiate shifted his muscular frame and turned his
attention back to the skull cradled in his palms. The crimson wine looked almost black in the dim candlelight.
The chamber had fallen deathly silent, and he could feel all of the witnesses watching him, waiting for him to
take his final oath and join their elite ranks.
Tonight, he thought, something is taking place within these walls that has never before occurred in the
history of this brotherhood. Not once, in centuries.
He knew it would be the spark . . . and it would give him unfathomable power. Energized, he drew a breath
and spoke aloud the same words that countless men had spoken before him in countries all over the world.
“May this wine I now drink become a deadly poison to me . . . should I ever knowingly or willfully violate my
oath.”
His words echoed in the hollow space.
Then all was quiet.
Steadying his hands, the initiate raised the skull to his mouth and felt his lips touch the dry bone. He closed
his eyes and tipped the skull toward his mouth, drinking the wine in long, deep swallows. When the last drop
was gone, he lowered the skull.
For an instant, he thought he felt his lungs growing tight, and his heart began to pound wildly. My God, they
know! Then, as quickly as it came, the feeling passed.
A pleasant warmth began to stream through his body. The initiate exhaled, smiling inwardly as he gazed up
at the unsuspecting gray-eyed man who had foolishly admitted him into this brotherhood's most secretive
ranks.
Soon you will lose everything you hold most dear.
CHAPTER 1
The Otis elevator climbing the south pillar of the Eiffel Tower was overflowing with tourists. Inside the
cramped lift, an austere businessman in a pressed suit gazed down at the boy beside him. “You look pale,
son. You should have stayed on the ground.”
“I’m okay . . .” the boy answered, struggling to control his anxiety. “I’ll get out on the next level.” I can’t
breathe.
The man leaned closer. “I thought by now you would have gotten over this.” He brushed the child’s cheek
affectionately.
The boy felt ashamed to disappoint his father, but he could barely hear through the ringing in his ears. I can’t
breathe. I’ve got to get out of this box!
The elevator operator was saying something reassuring about the lift’s articulated pistons and puddled-iron
construction. Far beneath them, the streets of Paris stretched out in all directions.
Almost there, the boy told himself, craning his neck and looking up at the unloading platform. Just hold on.
As the lift angled steeply toward the upper viewing deck, the shaft began to narrow, its massive struts
contracting into a tight, vertical tunnel.
“Dad, I don’t think—”
Suddenly a staccato crack echoed overhead. The carriage jerked, swaying awkwardly to one side. Frayed
cables began whipping around the carriage, thrashing like snakes. The boy reached out for his father.
“Dad!”
Their eyes locked for one terrifying second.
Then the bottom dropped out.
Robert Langdon jolted upright in his soft leather seat, startling out of the semiconscious daydream. He was
sitting all alone in the enormous cabin of a Falcon 2000EX corporate jet as it bounced its way through
turbulence. In the background, the dual Pratt & Whitney engines hummed evenly.
“Mr. Langdon?” The intercom crackled overhead. “We’re on final approach.”
Langdon sat up straight and slid his lecture notes back into his leather daybag. He’d been halfway through
reviewing Masonic symbology when his mind had drifted. The daydream about his late father, Langdon
suspected, had been stirred by this morning’s unexpected invitation from Langdon’s longtime mentor, Peter
Solomon.
The other man I never want to disappoint.
The fifty-eight-year-old philanthropist, historian, and scientist had taken Langdon under his wing nearly
thirty years ago, in many ways filling the void left by Langdon’s father’s death. Despite the man’s influential
family dynasty and massive wealth, Langdon had found humility and warmth in Solomon’s soft gray eyes.
Outside the window the sun had set, but Langdon could still make out the slender silhouette of the world’s
largest obelisk, rising on the horizon like the spire of an ancient gnomon. The 555-foot marble-faced obelisk
marked this nation’s heart. All around the spire, the meticulous geometry of streets and monuments radiated
outward.
Even from the air, Washington, D.C., exuded an almost mystical power.
Langdon loved this city, and as the jet touched down, he felt a rising excitement about what lay ahead. The
jet taxied to a private terminal somewhere in the vast expanse of Dulles International Airport and came to a
stop.
Langdon gathered his things, thanked the pilots, and stepped out of the jet’s luxurious interior onto the
foldout staircase. The cold January air felt liberating.
Breathe, Robert, he thought, appreciating the wide-open spaces.
A blanket of white fog crept across the runway, and Langdon had the sensation he was stepping into a marsh
as he descended onto the misty tarmac.
“Hello! Hello!” a singsong British voice shouted from across the tarmac. “Professor Langdon?”
Langdon looked up to see a middle-aged woman with a badge and clipboard hurrying toward him, waving
happily as he approached. Curly blond hair protruded from under a stylish knit wool hat.
“Welcome to Washington, sir!”
Langdon smiled. “Thank you.”
“My name is Pam, from passenger services.” The woman spoke with an exuberance that was almost
unsettling. “If you’ll come with me, sir, your car is waiting.”
Langdon followed her across the runway toward the Signature terminal, which was surrounded by glistening
private jets. A taxi stand for the rich and famous.
“I hate to embarrass you, Professor,” the woman said, sounding sheepish, “but you are the Robert Langdon
who writes books about symbols and religion, aren’t you?”
Langdon hesitated and then nodded.
“I thought so!” she said, beaming. “My book group read your book about the sacred feminine and the church!
What a delicious scandal that one caused! You do enjoy putting the fox in the henhouse!”
Langdon smiled. “Scandal wasn’t really my intention.”
The woman seemed to sense Langdon was not in the mood to discuss his work. “I’m sorry. Listen to me
rattling on. I know you probably get tired of being recognized . . . but it’s your own fault.” She playfully
motioned to his clothing. “Your uniform gave you away.”
My uniform? Langdon glanced down at his attire. He was wearing his usual charcoal turtleneck, Harris
Tweed jacket, khakis, and collegiate cordovan loafers . . . his standard attire for the classroom, lecture circuit,
author photos, and social events.
The woman laughed. “Those turtlenecks you wear are so dated. You’d look much sharper in a tie!”
No chance, Langdon thought. Little nooses.
Neckties had been required six days a week when Langdon attended Phillips Exeter Academy, and despite
the headmaster’s romantic claims that the origin of the cravat went back to the silk fascalia worn by Roman
orators to warm their vocal cords, Langdon knew that, etymologically, cravat actually derived from a
ruthless band of “Croat” mercenaries who donned knotted neckerchiefs before they stormed into battle. To
this day, this ancient battle garb was donned by modern office warriors hoping to intimidate their enemies in
daily boardroom battles.
“Thanks for the advice,” Langdon said with a chuckle. “I’ll consider a tie in the future.”
Mercifully, a professional-looking man in a dark suit got out of a sleek Lincoln Town Car parked near the
terminal and held up his finger. “Mr. Langdon? I’m Charles with Beltway Limousine.” He opened the
passenger door. “Good evening, sir. Welcome to Washington.”
Langdon tipped Pam for her hospitality and then climbed into the plush interior of the Town Car. The driver
showed him the temperature controls, the bottled water, and the basket of hot muffins. Seconds later,
Langdon was speeding away on a private access road. So this is how the other half lives.
As the driver gunned the car up Windsock Drive, he consulted his passenger manifest and placed a quick
call. “This is Beltway Limousine,” the driver said with professional efficiency. “I was asked to confirm once
my passenger had landed.” He paused. “Yes, sir. Your guest, Mr. Langdon, has arrived, and I will deliver
him to the Capitol Building by seven P.M. You’re welcome, sir.” He hung up.
Langdon had to smile. No stone left unturned. Peter Solomon’s attention to detail was one of his most potent
assets, allowing him to manage his substantial power with apparent ease. A few billion dollars in the bank
doesn’t hurt either.
Langdon settled into the plush leather seat and closed his eyes as the noise of the airport faded behind him.
The U.S. Capitol was a half hour away, and he appreciated the time alone to gather his thoughts. Everything
had happened so quickly today that Langdon only now had begun to think in earnest about the incredible
evening that lay ahead.
Arriving under a veil of secrecy, Langdon thought, amused by the prospect.
Ten miles from the Capitol Building, a lone figure was eagerly preparing for Robert Langdon’s arrival.
CHAPTER 2
The one who called himself Mal’akh pressed the tip of the needle against his shaved head, sighing with
pleasure as the sharp tool plunged in and out of his flesh. The soft hum of the electric device was addictive . .
. as was the bite of the needle sliding deep into his dermis and depositing its dye.
I am a masterpiece.
The goal of tattooing was never beauty. The goal was change. From the scarified Nubian priests of 2000
B.C., to the tattooed acolytes of the Cybele cult of ancient Rome, to the moko scars of the modern Maori,
humans have tattooed themselves as a way of offering up their bodies in partial sacrifice, enduring the
physical pain of embellishment and emerging changed beings.
Despite the ominous admonitions of Leviticus 19:28, which forbade the marking of one’s flesh, tattoos had
become a rite of passage shared by millions of people in the modern age—everyone from clean-cut teenagers
to hard-core drug users to suburban housewives.
The act of tattooing one’s skin was a transformative declaration of power, an announcement to the world: I
am in control of my own flesh. The intoxicating feeling of control derived from physical transformation had
addicted millions to flesh-altering practices . . . cosmetic surgery, body piercing, bodybuilding, and steroids .
. . even bulimia and transgendering. The human spirit craves mastery over its carnal shell.
A single bell chimed on Mal’akh’s grandfather clock, and he looked up. Six thirty P.M. Leaving his tools, he
wrapped the Kiryu silk robe around his naked, six-foot-three body and strode down the hall. The air inside
this sprawling mansion was heavy with the pungent fragrance of his skin dyes and smoke from the beeswax
candles he used to sterilize his needles. The towering young man moved down the corridor past priceless
Italian antiques—a Piranesi etching, a Savonarola chair, a silver Bugarini oil lamp.
He glanced through a floor-to-ceiling window as he passed, admiring the classical skyline in the distance.
The luminous dome of the U.S. Capitol glowed with solemn power against the dark winter sky.
This is where it is hidden, he thought. It is buried out there somewhere.
Few men knew it existed . . . and even fewer knew its awesome power or the ingenious way in which it had
been hidden. To this day, it remained this country’s greatest untold secret. Those few who did know the truth
kept it hidden behind a veil of symbols, legends, and allegory.
Now they have opened their doors to me, Mal’akh thought.
Three weeks ago, in a dark ritual witnessed by America’s most influential men, Mal’akh had ascended to the
thirty-third degree, the highest echelon of the world’s oldest surviving brotherhood. Despite Mal’akh’s new
rank, the brethren had told him nothing. Nor will they, he knew. That was not how it worked. There were
circles within circles . . . brotherhoods within brotherhoods. Even if Mal’akh waited years, he might never
earn their ultimate trust.
Fortunately, he did not need their trust to obtain their deepest secret.
My initiation served its purpose.
Now, energized by what lay ahead, he strode toward his bedroom. Throughout his entire home, audio
speakers broadcast the eerie strains of a rare recording of a castrato singing the “Lux Aeterna” from the Verdi
Requiem—a reminder of a previous life. Mal’akh touched a remote control to bring on the thundering “Dies
Irae.” Then, against a backdrop of crashing timpani and parallel fifths, he bounded up the marble staircase,
his robe billowing as he ascended on sinewy legs.
As he ran, his empty stomach growled in protest. For two days now, Mal’akh had fasted, consuming only
water, preparing his body in accordance with the ancient ways. Your hunger will be satisfied by dawn, he
reminded himself. Along with your pain.
Mal’akh entered his bedroom sanctuary with reverence, locking the door behind him. As he moved toward
his dressing area, he paused, feeling himself drawn to the enormous gilded mirror. Unable to resist, he turned
and faced his own reflection. Slowly, as if unwrapping a priceless gift, Mal’akh opened his robe to unveil his
naked form. The vision awed him.
I am a masterpiece.
His massive body was shaved and smooth. He lowered his gaze first to his feet, which were tattooed with the
scales and talons of a hawk. Above that, his muscular legs were tattooed as carved pillars—his left leg
spiraled and his right vertically striated. Boaz and Jachin. His groin and abdomen formed a decorated
archway, above which his powerful chest was emblazoned with the double-headed phoenix . . . each head in
profile with its visible eye formed by one of Mal’akh’s nipples. His shoulders, neck, face, and shaved head
were completely covered with an intricate tapestry of ancient symbols and sigils.
I am an artifact . . . an evolving icon.
One mortal man had seen Mal’akh naked, eighteen hours earlier. The man had shouted in fear. “Good God,
you’re a demon!”
“If you perceive me as such,” Mal’akh had replied, understanding as had the ancients that angels and demons
were identical—interchangeable archetypes—all a matter of polarity: the guardian angel who conquered your
enemy in battle was perceived by your enemy as a demon destroyer.
Mal’akh tipped his face down now and got an oblique view of the top of his head. There, within the
crownlike halo, shone a small circle of pale, untattooed flesh. This carefully guarded canvas was Mal’akh’s
only remaining piece of virgin skin. The sacred space had waited patiently . . . and tonight, it would be filled.
Although Mal’akh did not yet possess what he required to complete his masterpiece, he knew the moment
was fast approaching.
Exhilarated by his reflection, he could already feel his power growing. He closed his robe and walked to the
window, again gazing out at the mystical city before him. It is buried out there somewhere.
Refocusing on the task at hand, Mal’akh went to his dressing table and carefully applied a base of concealer
makeup to his face, scalp, and neck until his tattoos had disappeared. Then he donned the special set of
clothing and other items he had meticulously prepared for this evening. When he finished, he checked
himself in the mirror. Satisfied, he ran a soft palm across his smooth scalp and smiled.
It is out there, he thought. And tonight, one man will help me find it.
As Mal’akh exited his home, he prepared himself for the event that would soon shake the U.S. Capitol
Building. He had gone to enormous lengths to arrange all the pieces for tonight.
And now, at last, his final pawn had entered the game.
CHAPTER 3
Robert Langdon was busy reviewing his note cards when the hum of the Town Car’s tires changed pitch on
the road beneath him. Langdon glanced up, surprised to see where they were.
Memorial Bridge already?
He put down his notes and gazed out at the calm waters of the Potomac passing beneath him. A heavy mist
hovered on the surface. Aptly named, Foggy Bottom had always seemed a peculiar site on which to build the
nation’s capital. Of all the places in the New World, the forefathers had chosen a soggy riverside marsh on
which to lay the cornerstone of their utopian society.
Langdon gazed left, across the Tidal Basin, toward the gracefully rounded silhouette of the Jefferson
Memorial—America’s Pantheon, as many called it. Directly in front of the car, the Lincoln Memorial rose
with rigid austerity, its orthogonal lines reminiscent of Athens’s ancient Parthenon. But it was farther away
that Langdon saw the city’s centerpiece—the same spire he had seen from the air. Its architectural inspiration
was far, far older than the Romans or the Greeks.
America’s Egyptian obelisk.
The monolithic spire of the Washington Monument loomed dead ahead, illuminated against the sky like the
majestic mast of a ship. From Langdon’s oblique angle, the obelisk appeared ungrounded tonight . . .
swaying against the dreary sky as if on an unsteady sea. Langdon felt similarly ungrounded. His visit to
Washington had been utterly unexpected. I woke up this morning anticipating a quiet Sunday at home . . .
and now I’m a few minutes away from the U.S. Capitol.
This morning at four forty-five, Langdon had plunged into dead-calm water, beginning his day as he always
did, swimming fifty laps in the deserted Harvard Pool. His physique was not quite what it had been in his
college days as a water-polo all-American, but he was still lean and toned, respectable for a man in his
forties. The only difference now was the amount of effort it took Langdon to keep it that way.
When Langdon arrived home around six, he began his morning ritual of hand-grinding Sumatra coffee beans
and savoring the exotic scent that filled his kitchen. This morning, however, he was surprised to see the
blinking red light on his voice-mail display. Who calls at six A.M. on a Sunday? He pressed the button and
listened to the message.
“Good morning, Professor Langdon, I’m terribly sorry for this early-morning call.” The polite voice was
noticeably hesitant, with a hint of a southern accent. “My name is Anthony Jelbart, and I’m Peter Solomon’s
executive assistant. Mr. Solomon told me you’re an early riser . . . he has been trying to reach you this
morning on short notice. As soon as you receive this message, would you be so kind as to call Peter directly?
You probably have his new private line, but if not, it’s 202-329-5746.”
Langdon felt a sudden concern for his old friend. Peter Solomon was impeccably well-bred and courteous,
and certainly not the kind of man to call at daybreak on a Sunday unless something was very wrong.
Langdon left his coffee half made and hurried toward his study to return the call.
I hope he’s okay.
Peter Solomon had been a friend, mentor, and, although only twelve years Langdon’s senior, a father figure
to him ever since their first meeting at Princeton University. As a sophomore, Langdon had been required to
attend an evening guest lecture by the well-known young historian and philanthropist. Solomon had spoken
with a contagious passion, presenting a dazzling vision of semiotics and archetypal history that had sparked
in Langdon what would later become his lifelong passion for symbols. It was not Peter Solomon’s brilliance,
however, but the humility in his gentle gray eyes that had given Langdon the courage to write him a thankyou
letter. The young sophomore had never dreamed that Peter Solomon, one of America’s wealthiest and
most intriguing young intellectuals, would ever write back. But Solomon did. And it had been the beginning
of a truly gratifying friendship.
A prominent academic whose quiet manner belied his powerful heritage, Peter Solomon came from the
ultrawealthy Solomon family, whose names appeared on buildings and universities all over the nation. Like
the Rothschilds in Europe, the surname Solomon had always carried the mystique of American royalty and
success. Peter had inherited the mantle at a young age after the death of his father, and now, at fifty-eight, he
had held numerous positions of power in his life. He currently served as the head of the Smithsonian
Institution. Langdon occasionally ribbed Peter that the lone tarnish on his sterling pedigree was his diploma
from a second-rate university—Yale.
Now, as Langdon entered his study, he was surprised to see that he had received a fax from Peter as well.
Peter Solomon
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
Good morning, Robert,
I need to speak with you at once. Please call me this morning as soon as you can at 202-329-5746.
Peter
Langdon immediately dialed the number, sitting down at his hand-carved oak desk to wait as the call went
through.
“Office of Peter Solomon,” the familiar voice of the assistant answered. “This is Anthony. May I help you?”
“Hello, this is Robert Langdon. You left me a message earlier—”
“Yes, Professor Langdon!” The young man sounded relieved. “Thank you for calling back so quickly. Mr.
Solomon is eager to speak to you. Let me tell him you’re on the line. May I put you on hold?”
“Of course.”
As Langdon waited for Solomon to get on the line, he gazed down at Peter’s name atop the Smithsonian
letterhead and had to smile. Not many slackers in the Solomon clan. Peter’s ancestral tree burgeoned with the
names of wealthy business magnates, influential politicians, and a number of distinguished scientists, some
even fellows of London’s Royal Society. Solomon’s only living family member, his younger sister,
Katherine, had apparently inherited the science gene, because she was now a leading figure in a new cuttingedge
discipline called Noetic Science.
All Greek to me, Langdon thought, amused to recall Katherine’s unsuccessful attempt to explain Noetic
Science to him at a party at her brother’s home last year. Langdon had listened carefully and then replied,
“Sounds more like magic than science.”
Katherine winked playfully. “They’re closer than you think, Robert.”
Now Solomon’s assistant returned to the phone. “I’m sorry, Mr. Solomon is trying to get off a conference
call. Things are a little chaotic here this morning.”
“That’s not a problem. I can easily call back.”
“Actually, he asked me to fill you in on his reason for contacting you, if you don’t mind?”
“Of course not.”
The assistant inhaled deeply. “As you probably know, Professor, every year here in Washington, the board of
the Smithsonian hosts a private gala to thank our most generous supporters. Many of the country’s cultural
elite attend.”
Langdon knew his own bank account had too few zeros to qualify him as culturally elite, but he wondered if
maybe Solomon was going to invite him to attend nonetheless.
“This year, as is customary,” the assistant continued, “the dinner will be preceded by a keynote address.
We’ve been lucky enough to secure the National Statuary Hall for that speech.”
The best room in all of D.C., Langdon thought, recalling a political lecture he had once attended in the
dramatic semicircular hall. It was hard to forget five hundred folding chairs splayed in a perfect arc,
surrounded by thirty-eight life-size statues, in a room that had once served as the nation’s original House of
Representatives chamber.
“The problem is this,” the man said. “Our speaker has fallen ill and has just informed us she will be unable to
give the address.” He paused awkwardly. “This means we are desperate for a replacement speaker. And Mr.
Solomon is hoping you would consider filling in.”
Langdon did a double take. “Me?” This was not at all what he had expected. “I’m sure Peter could find a far
better substitute.”
“You’re Mr. Solomon’s first choice, Professor, and you’re being much too modest. The institution’s guests
would be thrilled to hear from you, and Mr. Solomon thought you could give the same lecture you gave on
Bookspan TV a few years back? That way, you wouldn’t have to prepare a thing. He said your talk involved
symbolism in the architecture of our nation’s capital—it sounds absolutely perfect for the venue.”
Langdon was not so sure. “If I recall, that lecture had more to do with the Masonic history of the building
than—”
“Exactly! As you know, Mr. Solomon is a Mason, as are many of his professional friends who will be in
attendance. I’m sure they would love to hear you speak on the topic.”
I admit it would be easy. Langdon had kept the lecture notes from every talk he’d ever given. “I suppose I
could consider it. What date is the event?”
The assistant cleared his throat, sounding suddenly uncomfortable. “Well, actually, sir, it’s tonight.”
Langdon laughed out loud. “Tonight?!”
“That’s why it’s so hectic here this morning. The Smithsonian is in a deeply embarrassing predicament . . .”
The assistant spoke more hurriedly now. “Mr. Solomon is ready to send a private jet to Boston for you. The
flight is only an hour, and you would be back home before midnight. You’re familiar with the private air
terminal at Boston’s Logan Airport?”
“I am,” Langdon admitted reluctantly. No wonder Peter always gets his way.
“Wonderful! Would you be willing to meet the jet there at say . . . five o’clock?”
“You haven’t left me much choice, have you?” Langdon chuckled.
“I just want to make Mr. Solomon happy, sir.”
Peter has that effect on people. Langdon considered it a long moment, seeing no way out. “All right. Tell
him I can do it.”
“Outstanding!” the assistant exclaimed, sounding deeply relieved. He gave Langdon the jet’s tail number and
various other information.
When Langdon finally hung up, he wondered if Peter Solomon had ever been told no.
Returning to his coffee preparation, Langdon scooped some additional beans into the grinder. A little extra
caffeine this morning, he thought. It’s going to be a long day.
CHAPTER 4
The U.S. Capitol Building stands regally at the eastern end of the National Mall, on a raised plateau that city
designer Pierre L’Enfant described as “a pedestal waiting for a monument.” The Capitol’s massive footprint
measures more than 750 feet in length and 350 feet deep. Housing more than sixteen acres of floor space, it
contains an astonishing 541 rooms. The neoclassical architecture is meticulously designed to echo the
grandeur of ancient Rome, whose ideals were the inspiration for America’s founders in establishing the laws
and culture of the new republic.
The new security checkpoint for tourists entering the Capitol Building is located deep within the recently
completed subterranean visitor center, beneath a magnificent glass skylight that frames the Capitol Dome.
Newly hired security guard Alfonso Nuñez carefully studied the male visitor now approaching his
checkpoint. The man had a shaved head and had been lingering in the lobby, completing a phone call before
entering the building. His right arm was in a sling, and he moved with a slight limp. He was wearing a
tattered army-navy surplus coat, which, combined with his shaved head, made Nuñez guess military. Those
who had served in the U.S. armed forces were among the most common visitors to Washington.
“Good evening, sir,” Nuñez said, following the security protocol of verbally engaging any male visitor who
entered alone.
“Hello,” the visitor said, glancing around at the nearly deserted entry. “Quiet night.”
“NFC play-offs,” Nuñez replied. “Everyone’s watching the Redskins tonight.” Nuñez wished he were, too,
but this was his first month on the job, and he’d drawn the short straw. “Metal objects in the dish, please.”
As the visitor fumbled to empty the pockets of his long coat with his one working hand, Nuñez watched him
carefully. Human instinct made special allowances for the injured and handicapped, but it was an instinct
Nuñez had been trained to override.
Nuñez waited while the visitor removed from his pockets the usual assortment of loose change, keys, and a
couple of cell phones. “Sprain?” Nuñez asked, eyeing the man’s injured hand, which appeared to be wrapped
in a series of thick Ace bandages.
The bald man nodded. “Slipped on the ice. A week ago. Still hurts like hell.”
“Sorry to hear that. Walk through, please.”
The visitor limped through the detector, and the machine buzzed in protest.
The visitor frowned. “I was afraid of that. I’m wearing a ring under these bandages. My finger was too
swollen to get it off, so the doctors wrapped right over it.”
“No problem,” Nuñez said. “I’ll use the wand.”
Nuñez ran the metal-detection wand over the visitor’s wrapped hand. As expected, the only metal he detected
was a large lump on the man’s injured ring finger. Nuñez took his time rubbing the metal detector over every
inch of the man’s sling and finger. He knew his supervisor was probably monitoring him on the closed circuit
in the building’s security center, and Nuñez needed this job. Always better to be cautious. He carefully slid
the wand up inside the man’s sling.
The visitor winced in pain.
“Sorry.”
“It’s okay,” the man said. “You can’t be too careful these days.”
“Ain’t that the truth.” Nuñez liked this guy. Strangely, that counted for a lot around here. Human instinct was
America’s first line of defense against terrorism. It was a proven fact that human intuition was a more
accurate detector of danger than all the electronic gear in the world—the gift of fear, as one of their security
reference books termed it.
In this case, Nuñez’s instincts sensed nothing that caused him any fear. The only oddity that he noticed, now
that they were standing so close, was that this tough-looking guy appeared to have used some kind of selftanner
or concealer makeup on his face. Whatever. Everyone hates to be pale in the winter.
“You’re fine,” Nuñez said, completing his sweep and stowing the wand.
“Thanks.” The man started collecting his belongings from the tray.
As he did, Nuñez noticed that the two fingers protruding from his bandage each bore a tattoo; the tip of his
index finger bore the image of a crown, and the tip of his thumb bore that of a star. Seems everyone has
tattoos these days, Nuñez thought, although the pads of his fingertips seemed like painful spots to get them.
“Those tats hurt?”
The man glanced down at his fingertips and chuckled. “Less than you might think.”
“Lucky,” Nuñez said. “Mine hurt a lot. I got a mermaid on my back when I was in boot camp.”
“A mermaid?” The bald man chuckled.
“Yeah,” he said, feeling sheepish. “The mistakes we make in our youth.”
“I hear you,” the bald man said. “I made a big mistake in my youth, too. Now I wake up with her every
morning.”
They both laughed as the man headed off.
Child’s play, Mal’akh thought as he moved past Nuñez and up the escalator toward the Capitol Building. The
entry had been easier than anticipated. Mal’akh’s slouching posture and padded belly had hidden his true
physique, while the makeup on his face and hands had hidden the tattoos that covered his body. The true
genius, however, was the sling, which disguised the potent object Mal’akh was transporting into the building.
A gift for the one man on earth who can help me obtain what I seek.
CHAPTER 5
The world’s largest and most technologically advanced museum is also one of the world’s best-kept secrets.
It houses more pieces than the Hermitage, the Vatican Museum, and the New York Metropolitan . . .
combined. Yet despite its magnificent collection, few members of the public are ever invited inside its
heavily guarded walls.
Located at 4210 Silver Hill Road just outside of Washington, D.C., the museum is a massive zigzag-shaped
edifice constructed of five interconnected pods—each pod larger than a football field. The building’s bluish
metal exterior barely hints at the strangeness within—a six-hundred-thousand-square-foot alien world that
contains a “dead zone,” a “wet pod,” and more than twelve miles of storage cabinets.
Tonight, scientist Katherine Solomon was feeling unsettled as she drove her white Volvo up to the building’s
main security gate.
The guard smiled. “Not a football fan, Ms. Solomon?” He lowered the volume on the Redskins play-off
pregame show.
Katherine forced a tense smile. “It’s Sunday night.”
“Oh, that’s right. Your meeting.”
“Is he here yet?” she asked anxiously.
He glanced down at his paperwork. “I don’t see him on the log.”
“I’m early.” Katherine gave a friendly wave and continued up the winding access road to her usual parking
spot at the bottom of the small, two-tiered lot. She began collecting her things and gave herself a quick check
in the rearview mirror—more out of force of habit than actual vanity.
Katherine Solomon had been blessed with the resilient Mediterranean skin of her ancestry, and even at fifty
years old she had a smooth olive complexion. She used almost no makeup and wore her thick black hair
unstyled and down. Like her older brother, Peter, she had gray eyes and a slender, patrician elegance.
You two might as well be twins, people often told them.
Their father had succumbed to cancer when Katherine was only seven, and she had little memory of him. Her
brother, eight years Katherine’s senior and only fifteen when their father died, had begun his journey toward
becoming the Solomon patriarch much sooner than anyone had ever dreamed. As expected, though, Peter had
grown into the role with the dignity and strength befitting their family name. To this day, he still watched
over Katherine as though they were just kids.
Despite her brother’s occasional prodding, and no shortage of suitors, Katherine had never married. Science
had become her life partner, and her work had proven more fulfilling and exciting than any man could ever
hope to be. Katherine had no regrets.
Her field of choice—Noetic Science—had been virtually unknown when she first heard of it, but in recent
years it had started opening new doors of understanding into the power of the human mind.
Our untapped potential is truly shocking.
Katherine’s two books on Noetics had established her as a leader in this obscure field, but her most recent
discoveries, when published, promised to make Noetic Science a topic of mainstream conversation around
the world.
Tonight, however, science was the last thing on her mind. Earlier in the day, she had received some truly
upsetting information relating to her brother. I still can’t believe it’s true. She’d thought of nothing else all
afternoon.
A pattering of light rain drummed on her windshield, and Katherine quickly gathered her things to get inside.
She was about to step out of her car when her cell phone rang.
She checked the caller ID and inhaled deeply.
Then she tucked her hair behind her ears and settled in to take the call.
Six miles away, Mal’akh was moving through the corridors of the U.S. Capitol Building with a cell phone
pressed to his ear. He waited patiently as the line rang.
Finally, a woman’s voice answered. “Yes?”
“We need to meet again,” Mal’akh said.
There was a long pause. “Is everything all right?”
“I have new information,” Mal’akh said.
“Tell me.”
Mal’akh took a deep breath. “That which your brother believes is hidden in D.C. . . . ?”
“Yes?”
“It can be found.”
Katherine Solomon sounded stunned. “You’re telling me—it is real?”
Mal’akh smiled to himself. “Sometimes a legend that endures for centuries . . . endures for a reason.”
CHAPTER 6
Is this as close as you can get?” Robert Langdon felt a sudden wave of anxiety as his driver parked on First
Street, a good quarter mile from the Capitol Building.
“Afraid so,” the driver said. “Homeland Security. No vehicles near landmark buildings anymore. I’m sorry,
sir.”
Langdon checked his watch, startled to see it was already 6:50. A construction zone around the National Mall
had slowed them down, and his lecture was to begin in ten minutes.
“Weather’s turning,” the driver said, hopping out and opening Langdon’s door for him. “You’ll want to
hurry.” Langdon reached for his wallet to tip the driver, but the man waved him off. “Your host already
added a very generous tip to the charge.”
Typical Peter, Langdon thought, gathering his things. “Okay, thanks for the ride.”
The first few raindrops began to fall as Langdon reached the top of the gracefully arched concourse that
descended to the new “underground” visitors’ entrance.
The Capitol Visitor Center had been a costly and controversial project. Described as an underground city to
rival parts of Disney World, this subterranean space reportedly provided over a half-million square feet of
space for exhibits, restaurants, and meeting halls.
Langdon had been looking forward to seeing it, although he hadn’t anticipated quite this long a walk. The
skies were threatening to open at any moment, and he broke into a jog, his loafers offering almost no traction
on the wet cement. I dressed for a lecture, not a four-hundred-yard downhill dash through the rain!
When he arrived at the bottom, he was breathless and panting. Langdon pushed through the revolving door,
taking a moment in the foyer to catch his breath and brush off the rain. As he did, he raised his eyes to the
newly completed space before him.
Okay, I’m impressed.
The Capitol Visitor Center was not at all what he had expected. Because the space was underground,
Langdon had been apprehensive about passing through it. A childhood accident had left him stranded at the
bottom of a deep well overnight, and Langdon now lived with an almost crippling aversion to enclosed
spaces. But this underground space was . . . airy somehow. Light. Spacious.
The ceiling was a vast expanse of glass with a series of dramatic light fixtures that threw a muted glow across
the pearl-colored interior finishes.
Normally, Langdon would have taken a full hour in here to admire the architecture, but with five minutes
until showtime, he put his head down and dashed through the main hall toward the security checkpoint and
escalators. Relax, he told himself. Peter knows you’re on your way. The event won’t start without you.
At the security point, a young Hispanic guard chatted with him while Langdon emptied his pockets and
removed his vintage watch.
“Mickey Mouse?” the guard said, sounding mildly amused.
Langdon nodded, accustomed to the comments. The collector’s edition Mickey Mouse watch had been a gift
from his parents on his ninth birthday. “I wear it to remind me to slow down and take life less seriously.”
“I don’t think it’s working,” the guard said with a smile. “You look like you’re in a serious hurry.”
Langdon smiled and put his daybag through the X-ray machine. “Which way to the Statuary Hall?”
The guard motioned toward the escalators. “You’ll see the signs.”
“Thanks.” Langdon grabbed his bag off the conveyor and hurried on.
As the escalator ascended, Langdon took a deep breath and tried to gather his thoughts. He gazed up through
the rain-speckled glass ceiling at the mountainous form of the illuminated Capitol Dome overhead. It was an
astonishing building. High atop her roof, almost three hundred feet in the air, the Statue of Freedom peered
out into the misty darkness like a ghostly sentinel. Langdon always found it ironic that the workers who
hoisted each piece of the nineteen-and-a-half-foot bronze statue to her perch were slaves—a Capitol secret
that seldom made the syllabi of high school history classes.
This entire building, in fact, was a treasure trove of bizarre arcana that included a “killer bathtub” responsible
for the pneumonic murder of Vice President Henry Wilson, a staircase with a permanent bloodstain over
which an inordinate number of guests seemed to trip, and a sealed basement chamber in which workers in
1930 discovered General John Alexander Logan’s long-deceased stuffed horse.
No legends were as enduring, however, as the claims of thirteen different ghosts that haunted this building.
The spirit of city designer Pierre L’Enfant frequently was reported wandering the halls, seeking payment of
his bill, now two hundred years overdue. The ghost of a worker who fell from the Capitol Dome during
construction was seen wandering the corridors with a tray of tools. And, of course, the most famous
apparition of all, reported numerous times in the Capitol basement—an ephemeral black cat that prowled the
substructure’s eerie maze of narrow passageways and cubicles.
Langdon stepped off the escalator and again checked his watch. Three minutes. He hurried down the wide
corridor, following the signs toward the Statuary Hall and rehearsing his opening remarks in his head.
Langdon had to admit that Peter’s assistant had been correct; this lecture topic would be a perfect match for
an event hosted in Washington, D.C., by a prominent Mason.
It was no secret that D.C. had a rich Masonic history. The cornerstone of this very building had been laid in a
full Masonic ritual by George Washington himself. This city had been conceived and designed by Master
Masons—George Washington, Ben Franklin, and Pierre L’Enfant—powerful minds who adorned their new
capital with Masonic symbolism, architecture, and art.
Of course, people see in those symbols all kinds of crazy ideas.
Many conspiracy theorists claimed the Masonic forefathers had concealed powerful secrets throughout
Washington along with symbolic messages hidden in the city’s layout of streets. Langdon never paid any
attention. Misinformation about the Masons was so commonplace that even educated Harvard students
seemed to have surprisingly warped conceptions about the brotherhood.
Last year, a freshman had rushed wild-eyed into Langdon’s classroom with a printout from the Web. It was a
street map of D.C. on which certain streets had been highlighted to form various shapes—satanic pentacles, a
Masonic compass and square, the head of Baphomet—proof apparently that the Masons who designed
Washington, D.C., were involved in some kind of dark, mystical conspiracy.
“Fun,” Langdon said, “but hardly convincing. If you draw enough intersecting lines on a map, you’re bound
to find all kinds of shapes.”
“But this can’t be coincidence!” the kid exclaimed.
Langdon patiently showed the student that the same exact shapes could be formed on a street map of Detroit.
The kid seemed sorely disappointed.
“Don’t be disheartened,” Langdon said. “Washington does have some incredible secrets . . . just none on this
street map.”
The young man perked up. “Secrets? Like what?”
“Every spring I teach a course called Occult Symbols. I talk a lot about D.C. You should take the course.”
“Occult symbols!” The freshman looked excited again. “So there are devil symbols in D.C.!”
Langdon smiled. “Sorry, but the word occult, despite conjuring images of devil worship, actually means
‘hidden’ or ‘obscured.’ In times of religious oppression, knowledge that was counterdoctrinal had to be kept
hidden or ‘occult,’ and because the church felt threatened by this, they redefined anything ‘occult’ as evil,
and the prejudice survived.”
“Oh.” The kid slumped.
Nonetheless, that spring, Langdon spotted the freshman seated in the front row as five hundred students
bustled into Harvard’s Sanders Theatre, a hollow old lecture hall with creaking wooden benches.
“Good morning, everybody,” Langdon shouted from the expansive stage. He turned on a slide projector, and
an image materialized behind him. “As you’re getting settled, how many of you recognize the building in this
picture?”
“U.S. Capitol!” dozens of voices called out in unison. “Washington, D.C.!”
“Yes. There are nine million pounds of ironwork in that dome. An unparalleled feat of architectural ingenuity
for the 1850s.”
“Awesome!” somebody shouted.
Langdon rolled his eyes, wishing somebody would ban that word. “Okay, and how many of you have ever
been to Washington?”
A scattering of hands went up.
“So few?” Langdon feigned surprise. “And how many of you have been to Rome, Paris, Madrid, or
London?”
Almost all the hands in the room went up.
As usual. One of the rites of passage for American college kids was a summer with a Eurorail ticket before
the harsh reality of real life set in. “It appears many more of you have visited Europe than have visited your
own capital. Why do you think that is?”
“No drinking age in Europe!” someone in back shouted.
Langdon smiled. “As if the drinking age here stops any of you?”
Everyone laughed.
It was the first day of school, and the students were taking longer than usual to get settled, shifting and
creaking in their wooden pews. Langdon loved teaching in this hall because he always knew how engaged
the students were simply by listening to how much they fidgeted in their pews.
“Seriously,” Langdon said, “Washington, D.C., has some of the world’s finest architecture, art, and
symbolism. Why would you go overseas before visiting your own capital?”
“Ancient stuff is cooler,” someone said.
“And by ancient stuff,” Langdon clarified, “I assume you mean castles, crypts, temples, that sort of thing?”
Their heads nodded in unison.
“Okay. Now, what if I told you that Washington, D.C., has every one of those things? Castles, crypts,
pyramids, temples . . . it’s all there.”
The creaking diminished.
“My friends,” Langdon said, lowering his voice and moving to the front of the stage, “in the next hour, you
will discover that our nation is overflowing with secrets and hidden history. And exactly as in Europe, all of
the best secrets are hidden in plain view.”
The wooden pews fell dead silent.
Gotcha.
Langdon dimmed the lights and called up his second slide. “Who can tell me what George Washington is
doing here?”
The slide was a famous mural depicting George Washington dressed in full Masonic regalia standing before
an odd-looking contraption—a giant wooden tripod that supported a rope-and-pulley system from which was
suspended a massive block of stone. A group of well-dressed onlookers stood around him.
“Lifting that big block of stone?” someone ventured.
Langdon said nothing, preferring that a student make the correction if possible.
“Actually,” another student offered, “I think Washington is lowering the rock. He’s wearing a Masonic
costume. I’ve seen pictures of Masons laying cornerstones before. The ceremony always uses that tripod
thing to lower the first stone.”
“Excellent,” Langdon said. “The mural portrays the Father of Our Country using a tripod and pulley to lay
the cornerstone of our Capitol Building on September 18, 1793, between the hours of eleven fifteen and
twelve thirty.” Langdon paused, scanning the class. “Can anyone tell me the significance of that date and
time?”
Silence.
“What if I told you that precise moment was chosen by three famous Masons—George Washington,
Benjamin Franklin, and Pierre L’Enfant, the primary architect for D.C.?”
More silence.
“Quite simply, the cornerstone was set at that date and time because, among other things, the auspicious
Caput Draconis was in Virgo.”
Everyone exchanged odd looks.
“Hold on,” someone said. “You mean . . . like astrology?”
“Exactly. Although a different astrology than we know today.”
A hand went up. “You mean our Founding Fathers believed in astrology?”
Langdon grinned. “Big-time. What would you say if I told you the city of Washington, D.C., has more
astrological signs in its architecture than any other city in the world—zodiacs, star charts, cornerstones laid at
precise astrological dates and times? More than half of the framers of our Constitution were Masons, men
who strongly believed that the stars and fate were intertwined, men who paid close attention to the layout of
the heavens as they structured their new world.”
“But that whole thing about the Capitol cornerstone being laid while Caput Draconis was in Virgo—who
cares? Can’t that just be coincidence?”
“An impressive coincidence considering that the cornerstones of the three structures that make up Federal
Triangle—the Capitol, the White House, the Washington Monument—were all laid in different years but
were carefully timed to occur under this exact same astrological condition.”
Langdon’s gaze was met by a room full of wide eyes. A number of heads dipped down as students began
taking notes.
A hand in back went up. “Why did they do that?”
Langdon chuckled. “The answer to that is an entire semester’s worth of material. If you’re curious, you
should take my mysticism course. Frankly, I don’t think you guys are emotionally prepared to hear the
answer.”
“What?” the person shouted. “Try us!”
Langdon made a show of considering it and then shook his head, toying with them. “Sorry, I can’t do that.
Some of you are only freshmen. I’m afraid it might blow your minds.”
“Tell us!” everyone shouted.
Langdon shrugged. “Perhaps you should join the Masons or Eastern Star and learn about it from the source.”
“We can’t get in,” a young man argued. “The Masons are like a supersecret society!”
“Supersecret? Really?” Langdon remembered the large Masonic ring that his friend Peter Solomon wore
proudly on his right hand. “Then why do Masons wear obvious Masonic rings, tie clips, or pins? Why are
Masonic buildings clearly marked? Why are their meeting times in the newspaper?” Langdon smiled at all
the puzzled faces. “My friends, the Masons are not a secret society . . . they are a society with secrets.”
“Same thing,” someone muttered.
“Is it?” Langdon challenged. “Would you consider Coca-Cola a secret society?”
“Of course not,” the student said.
“Well, what if you knocked on the door of corporate headquarters and asked for the recipe for Classic
Coke?”
“They’d never tell you.”
“Exactly. In order to learn Coca-Cola’s deepest secret, you would need to join the company, work for many
years, prove you were trustworthy, and eventually rise to the upper echelons of the company, where that
information might be shared with you. Then you would be sworn to secrecy.”
“So you’re saying Freemasonry is like a corporation?” “Only insofar as they have a strict hierarchy and they
take secrecy very seriously.”
“My uncle is a Mason,” a young woman piped up. “And my aunt hates it because he won’t talk about it with
her. She says Masonry is some kind of strange religion.”
“A common misperception.”
“It’s not a religion?”
“Give it the litmus test,” Langdon said. “Who here has taken Professor Witherspoon’s comparative religion
course?”
Several hands went up.
“Good. So tell me, what are the three prerequisites for an ideology to be considered a religion?”
“ABC,” one woman offered. “Assure, Believe, Convert.”
“Correct,” Langdon said. “Religions assure salvation; religions believe in a precise theology; and religions
convert nonbelievers.” He paused. “Masonry, however, is batting zero for three. Masons make no promises
of salvation; they have no specific theology; and they do not seek to convert you. In fact, within Masonic
lodges, discussions of religion are prohibited.”
“So . . . Masonry is anti religious?”
“On the contrary. One of the prerequisites for becoming a Mason is that you must believe in a higher power.
The difference between Masonic spirituality and organized religion is that the Masons do not impose a
specific definition or name on a higher power. Rather than definitive theological identities like God, Allah,
Buddha, or Jesus, the Masons use more general terms like Supreme Being or Great Architect of the Universe.
This enables Masons of different faiths to gather together.”
“Sounds a little far-out,” someone said.
“Or, perhaps, refreshingly open-minded?” Langdon offered. “In this age when different cultures are killing
each other over whose definition of God is better, one could say the Masonic tradition of tolerance and openmindedness
is commendable.” Langdon paced the stage. “Moreover, Masonry is open to men of all races,
colors, and creeds, and provides a spiritual fraternity that does not discriminate in any way.”
“Doesn’t discriminate?” A member of the university’s Women’s Center stood up. “How many women are
permitted to be Masons, Professor Langdon?”
Langdon showed his palms in surrender. “A fair point. Freemasonry had its roots, traditionally, in the stone
masons’ guilds of Europe and was therefore a man’s organization. Several hundred years ago, some say as
early as 1703, a women’s branch called Eastern Star was founded. They have more than a million members.”
“Nonetheless,” the woman said, “Masonry is a powerful organization from which women are excluded.”
Langdon was not sure how powerful the Masons really were anymore, and he was not going to go down that
road; perceptions of the modern Masons ranged from their being a group of harmless old men who liked to
play dress-up . . . all the way to an underground cabal of power brokers who ran the world. The truth, no
doubt, was somewhere in the middle.
“Professor Langdon,” called a young man with curly hair in the back row, “if Masonry is not a secret society,
not a corporation, and not a religion, then what is it?”
“Well, if you were to ask a Mason, he would offer the following definition: Masonry is a system of morality,
veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols.”
“Sounds to me like a euphemism for ‘freaky cult.’ ”
“Freaky, you say?”
“Hell yes!” the kid said, standing up. “I heard what they do inside those secret buildings! Weird candlelight
rituals with coffins, and nooses, and drinking wine out of skulls. Now that’s freaky!”
Langdon scanned the class. “Does that sound freaky to anyone else?”
“Yes!” they all chimed in.
Langdon feigned a sad sigh. “Too bad. If that’s too freaky for you, then I know you’ll never want to join my
cult.”
Silence settled over the room. The student from the Women’s Center looked uneasy. “You’re in a cult?”
Langdon nodded and lowered his voice to a conspiratorial whisper. “Don’t tell anyone, but on the pagan day
of the sun god Ra, I kneel at the foot of an ancient instrument of torture and consume ritualistic symbols of
blood and flesh.”
The class looked horrified.
Langdon shrugged. “And if any of you care to join me, come to the Harvard chapel on Sunday, kneel beneath
the crucifix, and take Holy Communion.”
The classroom remained silent.
Langdon winked. “Open your minds, my friends. We all fear what we do not understand.”
The tolling of a clock began echoing through the Capitol corridors.
Seven o’clock.
Robert Langdon was now running. Talk about a dramatic entrance. Passing through the House Connecting
Corridor, he spotted the entrance to the National Statuary Hall and headed straight for it.
As he neared the door, he slowed to a nonchalant stroll and took several deep breaths. Buttoning his jacket,
he lifted his chin ever so slightly and turned the corner just as the final chime sounded.
Showtime.
As Professor Robert Langdon strode into the National Statuary Hall, he raised his eyes and smiled warmly.
An instant later, his smile evaporated. He stopped dead in his tracks.
Something was very, very wrong.
CHAPTER 7
Katherine Solomon hurried across the parking lot through the cold rain, wishing she had worn more than
jeans and a cashmere sweater. As she neared the building’s main entrance, the roar of the giant air purifiers
got louder. She barely heard them, her ears still ringing from the phone call she’d just received.
That which your brother believes is hidden in D.C. . . . it can be found.
Katherine found the notion almost impossible to believe. She and the caller still had much to discuss and had
agreed to do so later that evening.
Reaching the main doors, she felt the same sense of excitement she always felt upon entering the gargantuan
building. Nobody knows this place is here.
The sign on the door announced:
SMITHSONIAN MUSEUM
SUPPORT CENTER
(SMSC)
The Smithsonian Institution, despite having more than a dozen massive museums on the National Mall, had a
collection so huge that only 2 percent of it could be on display at any one time. The other 98 percent of the
collection had to be stored somewhere. And that somewhere . . . was here.
Not surprisingly, this building was home to an astonishingly diverse array of artifacts—giant Buddhas,
handwritten codices, poisoned darts from New Guinea, jewel-encrusted knives, a kayak made of baleen.
Equally mind-boggling were the building’s natural treasures—plesiosaur skeletons, a priceless meteorite
collection, a giant squid, even a collection of elephant skulls brought back from an African safari by Teddy
Roosevelt.
But none of this was why the Smithsonian secretary, Peter Solomon, had introduced his sister to the SMSC
three years ago. He had brought her to this place not to behold scientific marvels, but rather to create them.
And that was exactly what Katherine had been doing.
Deep within this building, in the darkness of the most remote recesses, was a small scientific laboratory
unlike any other in the world. The recent breakthroughs Katherine had made here in the field of Noetic
Science had ramifications across every discipline—from physics, to history, to philosophy, to religion. Soon
everything will change, she thought.
As Katherine entered the lobby, the front desk guard quickly stashed his radio and yanked the earplugs from
his ears. “Ms. Solomon!” He smiled broadly.
“Redskins?”
He blushed, looking guilty. “Pregame.”
She smiled. “I won’t tell.” She walked to the metal detector and emptied her pockets. When she slid the gold
Cartier watch from her wrist, she felt the usual pang of sadness. The timepiece had been a gift from her
mother for Katherine’s eighteenth birthday. Almost ten years had now passed since her mother had died
violently . . . passing away in Katherine’s arms.
“So, Ms. Solomon?” the guard whispered jokingly. “Are you ever gonna tell anybody what you’re doing
back there?”
She glanced up. “Someday, Kyle. Not tonight.”
“Come on,” he pressed. “A secret lab . . . in a secret museum? You must be doing something cool.”
Miles beyond cool, Katherine thought as she collected her things. The truth was that Katherine was doing
science so advanced that it no longer even resembled science.
CHAPTER 8
Robert Langdon stood frozen in the doorway of the National Statuary Hall and studied the startling scene
before him. The room was precisely as he remembered it—a balanced semicircle built in the style of a Greek
amphitheater. The graceful arched walls of sandstone and Italian plaster were punctuated by columns of
variegated breccia, interspersed with the nation’s statuary collection—life-size statues of thirty-eight great
Americans standing in a semicircle on a stark expanse of black-and-white marble tile.
It was exactly as Langdon had recalled from the lecture he had once attended here.
Except for one thing.
Tonight, the room was empty.
No chairs. No audience. No Peter Solomon. Just a handful of tourists milling around aimlessly, oblivious to
Langdon’s grand entrance. Did Peter mean the Rotunda? He peered down the south corridor toward the
Rotunda and could see tourists milling around in there, too.
The echoes of the clock chime had faded. Langdon was now officially late.
He hurried back into the hallway and found a docent. “Excuse me, the lecture for the Smithsonian event
tonight? Where is that being held?”
The docent hesitated. “I’m not sure, sir. When does it start?”
“Now!”
The man shook his head. “I don’t know about any Smithsonian event this evening—not here, at least.”
Bewildered, Langdon hurried back toward the center of the room, scanning the entire space. Is Solomon
playing some kind of joke? Langdon couldn’t imagine it. He pulled out his cell phone and the fax page from
this morning and dialed Peter’s number.
His phone took a moment to locate a signal inside the enormous building. Finally, it began to ring.
The familiar southern accent answered. “Peter Solomon’s office, this is Anthony. May I help you?”
“Anthony!” Langdon said with relief. “I’m glad you’re still there. This is Robert Langdon. There seems to be
some confusion about the lecture. I’m standing in the Statuary Hall, but there’s nobody here. Has the lecture
been moved to a different room?”
“I don’t believe so, sir. Let me check.” His assistant paused a moment. “Did you confirm with Mr. Solomon
directly?”
Langdon was confused. “No, I confirmed with you, Anthony. This morning!”
“Yes, I recall that.” There was a silence on the line. “That was a bit careless of you, don’t you think,
Professor?”
Langdon was now fully alert. “I beg your pardon?”
“Consider this . . .” the man said. “You received a fax asking you to call a number, which you did. You spoke
to a total stranger who said he was Peter Solomon’s assistant. Then you willingly boarded a private plane to
Washington and climbed into a waiting car. Is that right?”
Langdon felt a chill race through his body. “Who the hell is this? Where is Peter?”
“I’m afraid Peter Solomon has no idea you’re in Washington today.” The man’s southern accent disappeared,
and his voice morphed into a deeper, mellifluous whisper. “You are here, Mr. Langdon, because I want you
here.”
CHAPTER 9
Inside the Statuary Hall, Robert Langdon clutched his cell phone to his ear and paced in a tight circle. “Who
the hell are you?”
The man’s reply was a silky calm whisper. “Do not be alarmed, Professor. You have been summoned here
for a reason.”
“Summoned?” Langdon felt like a caged animal. “Try kidnapped!”
“Hardly.” The man’s voice was eerily serene. “If I wanted to harm you, you would be dead in your Town Car
right now.” He let the words hang for a moment. “My intentions are purely noble, I assure you. I would
simply like to offer you an invitation.”
No thanks. Ever since his experiences in Europe over the last several years, Langdon’s unwanted celebrity
had made him a magnet for nut-cases, and this one had just crossed a very serious line. “Look, I don’t know
what the hell is going on here, but I’m hanging up—”
“Unwise,” said the man. “Your window of opportunity is very small if you want to save Peter Solomon’s
soul.”
Langdon drew a sharp breath. “What did you say?”
“I’m sure you heard me.”
The way this man had uttered Peter’s name had stopped Langdon cold. “What do you know about Peter?”
“At this point, I know his deepest secrets. Mr. Solomon is my guest, and I can be a persuasive host.”
This can’t be happening. “You don’t have Peter.”
“I answered his private cell phone. That should give you pause.”
“I’m calling the police.”
“No need,” the man said. “The authorities will join you momentarily.”
What is this lunatic talking about? Langdon’s tone hardened. “If you have Peter, put him on the phone right
now.” “
“That’s impossible. Mr. Solomon is trapped in an unfortunate place.” The man paused. “He is in the Araf.”
“Where?” Langdon realized he was clutching his phone so tightly his fingers were going numb.
“The Araf? Hamistagan? That place to which Dante devoted the canticle immediately following his
legendary Inferno?”
The man’s religious and literary references solidified Langdon’s suspicion that he was dealing with a
madman. The second canticle. Langdon knew it well; nobody escaped Phillips Exeter Academy without
reading Dante. “You’re saying you think Peter Solomon is . . . in purgatory?”
“A crude word you Christians use, but yes, Mr. Solomon is in the in-between.”
The man’s words hung in Langdon’s ear. “Are you saying Peter is . . . dead?”
“Not exactly, no.”
“Not exactly?!” Langdon yelled, his voice echoing sharply in the hall. A family of tourists looked over at
him. He turned away and lowered his voice. “Death is usually an all-or-nothing thing!”
“You surprise me, Professor. I expected you to have a better understanding of the mysteries of life and death.
There is a world in between—a world in which Peter Solomon is hovering at the moment. He can either
return to your world, or he can move on to the next . . . depending on your actions right now.”
Langdon tried to process this. “What do you want from me?”
“It’s simple. You have been given access to something quite ancient. And tonight, you will share it with me.”
“I have no idea what you’re talking about.”
“No? You pretend not to understand the ancient secrets that have been entrusted to you?”
Langdon felt a sudden sinking sensation, now guessing what this was probably about. Ancient secrets. He
had not uttered a word to anyone about his experiences in Paris several years earlier, but Grail fanatics had
followed the media coverage closely, some connecting the dots and believing Langdon was now privy to
secret information regarding the Holy Grail—perhaps even its location.
“Look,” Langdon said, “if this is about the Holy Grail, I can assure you I know nothing more than—”
“Don’t insult my intelligence, Mr. Langdon,” the man snapped. “I have no interest in anything so frivolous as
the Holy Grail or mankind’s pathetic debate over whose version of history is correct. Circular arguments
over the semantics of faith hold no interest for me. Those are questions answered only through death.”
The stark words left Langdon confused. “Then what the hell is this about?”
The man paused for several seconds. “As you may know, there exists within this city an ancient portal.”
An ancient portal?
“And tonight, Professor, you will unlock it for me. You should be honored I contacted you—this is the
invitation of your lifetime. You alone have been chosen.”
And you have lost your mind. “I’m sorry, but you’ve chosen poorly,” Langdon said. “I don’t know anything
about any ancient portal.”
“You don’t understand, Professor. It was not I who chose you . . . it was Peter Solomon.”
“What?” Langdon replied, his voice barely a whisper.
“Mr. Solomon told me how to find the portal, and he confessed to me that only one man on earth could
unlock it. And he said that man is you.”
“If Peter said that, he was mistaken . . . or lying.”
“I think not. He was in a fragile state when he confessed that fact, and I am inclined to believe him.”
Langdon felt a stab of anger. “I’m warning you, if you hurt Peter in any—”
“It’s far too late for that,” the man said in an amused tone. “I’ve already taken what I need from Peter
Solomon. But for his sake, I suggest you provide what I need from you. Time is of the essence . . . for both of
you. I suggest you find the portal and unlock it. Peter will point the way.”
Peter? “I thought you said Peter was in ‘purgatory.’”
“As above, so below,” the man said.
Langdon felt a deepening chill. This strange response was an ancient Hermetic adage that proclaimed a belief
in the physical connection between heaven and earth. As above, so below. Langdon eyed the vast room and
wondered how everything had veered so suddenly out of control tonight. “Look, I don’t know how to find
any ancient portal. I’m calling the police.”
“It really hasn’t dawned on you yet, has it? Why you were chosen?”
“No,” Langdon said.
“It will,” he replied, chuckling. “Any moment now.”
Then the line went dead.
Langdon stood rigid for several terrifying moments, trying to process what had just happened.
Suddenly, in the distance, he heard an unexpected sound.
It was coming from the Rotunda.
Someone was screaming.
CHAPTER 10
Robert Langdon had entered the Capitol Rotunda many times in his life, but never at a full sprint. As he ran
through the north entrance, he spotted a group of tourists clustered in the center of the room. A small boy was
screaming, and his parents were trying to console him. Others were crowding around, and several security
guards were doing their best to restore order.
“He pulled it out of his sling,” someone said frantically, “and just left it there!”
As Langdon drew nearer, he got his first glimpse of what was causing all the commotion. Admittedly, the
object on the Capitol floor was odd, but its presence hardly warranted screaming.
The device on the floor was one Langdon had seen many times. The Harvard art department had dozens of
these—life-size plastic models used by sculptors and painters to help them render the human body’s most
complex feature, which, surprisingly, was not the human face but rather the human hand. Someone left a
mannequin hand in the Rotunda?
Mannequin hands, or handequins as some called them, had articulated fingers enabling an artist to pose the
hand in whatever position he wanted, which for sophomoric college students was often with the middle
finger extended straight up in the air. This handequin, however, had been positioned with its index finger and
thumb pointing up toward the ceiling.
As Langdon drew nearer, though, he realized this handequin was unusual. Its plastic surface was not smooth
like most. Instead, the surface was mottled and slightly wrinkled, and appeared almost . . .
Like real skin.
Langdon stopped abruptly.
Now he saw the blood. My God!
The severed wrist appeared to have been skewered onto a spiked wooden base so that it would stand up. A
wave of nausea rushed over him. Langdon inched closer, unable to breathe, seeing now that the tips of the
index finger and thumb had been decorated with tiny tattoos. The tattoos, however, were not what held
Langdon’s attention. His gaze moved instantly to the familiar golden ring on the fourth finger.
No.
Langdon recoiled. His world began to spin as he realized he was looking at the severed right hand of Peter
Solomon.
CHAPTER 11
Why isn’t Peter answering? Katherine Solomon wondered as she hung up her cell phone. Where is he?
For three years, Peter Solomon had always been the first to arrive for their weekly seven P.M. Sunday-night
meetings. It was their private family ritual, a way to remain connected before the start of a new week, and for
Peter to stay up-to-date on Katherine’s work at the lab.
He’s never late, she thought, and he always answers his phone. To make matters worse, Katherine was still
not sure what she was going to say to him when he did finally arrive. How do I even begin to ask him about
what I found out today?
Her footsteps clicked rhythmically down the cement corridor that ran like a spine through the SMSC. Known
as “The Street,” the corridor connected the building’s five massive storage pods. Forty feet overhead, a
circulatory system of orange ductwork throbbed with the heartbeat of the building—the pulsing sounds of
thousands of cubic feet of filtered air being circulated.
Normally, during her nearly quarter-mile walk to her lab, Katherine felt calmed by the breathing sounds of
the building. Tonight, however, the pulsing had her on edge. What she had learned about her brother today
would have troubled anyone, and yet because Peter was the only family she had in the world, Katherine felt
especially disturbed to think he might be keeping secrets from her.
As far as she knew, he had kept a secret from her only once . . . a wonderful secret that was hidden at the end
of this very hallway. Three years ago, her brother had walked Katherine down this corridor, introducing her
to the SMSC by proudly showing off some of the building’s more unusual items—the Mars meteorite ALH-
84001, the handwritten pictographic diary of Sitting Bull, a collection of wax-sealed Ball jars containing
original specimens collected by Charles Darwin.
At one point, they walked past a heavy door with a small window. Katherine caught a glimpse of what lay
beyond and gasped. “What in the world is that?!”
Her brother chuckled and kept walking. “Pod Three. It’s called Wet Pod. Pretty unusual sight, isn’t it?”
Terrifying is more like it. Katherine hurried after him. This building was like another planet.
“What I really want to show you is in Pod Five,” her brother said, guiding her down the seemingly endless
corridor. “It’s our newest addition. It was built to house artifacts from the basement of the National Museum
of Natural History. That collection is scheduled for relocation here in about five years, which means Pod
Five is sitting empty at the moment.”
Katherine glanced over. “Empty? So why are we looking at it?”
Her brother’s gray eyes flashed a familiar mischief. “It occurred to me that because nobody is using the
space, maybe you could use it.”
“Me?”
“Sure. I thought maybe you could use a dedicated lab space—a facility where you can actually perform some
of the theoretical experiments you’ve been developing for all these years.”
Katherine stared at her brother in shock. “But, Peter, those experiments are theoretical! To actually perform
them would be almost impossible.”
“Nothing is impossible, Katherine, and this building is perfect for you. The SMSC is not just a warehouse of
treasures; it’s one of the world’s most advanced scientific research facilities. We’re constantly taking pieces
from the collection and examining them with the best quantitative technologies money can buy. All the
equipment you could possibly need would be here at your disposal.”
“Peter, the technologies required to run these experiments are—”
“Already in place.” He smiled broadly. “The lab is done.”
Katherine stopped short.
Her brother pointed down the long corridor. “We’re going to see it now.”
Katherine could barely speak. “You . . . you built me a lab?”
“It’s my job. The Smithsonian was established to advance scientific knowledge. As secretary, I must take
that charge seriously. I believe the experiments you’ve proposed have the potential to push the boundaries of
science into uncharted territory.” Peter stopped and looked her squarely in the eyes. “Whether or not you
were my sister, I would feel obliged to support this research. Your ideas are brilliant. The world deserves to
see where they lead.”
“Peter, I can’t possibly—”
“Okay, relax . . . it was my own money, and nobody’s using Pod Five right now. When you’re done with
your experiments, you’ll move out. Besides, Pod Five has some unique properties that will be perfect for
your work.”
Katherine could not imagine what a massive, empty pod might offer that would serve her research, but she
sensed she was about to find out. They had just reached a steel door with boldly stenciled letters:
POD 5
Her brother inserted his key card into a slot and an electronic keypad lit up. He raised his finger to type his
access code, but paused, arching his eyebrows in the same mischievous way he always had as a boy. “You
sure you’re ready?”
She nodded. My brother, always the showman.
“Stand back.” Peter hit the keys.
The steel door hissed loudly open.
Beyond the threshold was only inky blackness . . . a yawning void. A hollow moan seemed to echo out of the
depths. Katherine felt a cold blast of air emanating from within. It was like staring into the Grand Canyon at
night.
“Picture an empty airline hangar waiting for a fleet of Airbuses,” her brother said, “and you get the basic
idea.”
Katherine felt herself take a step backward.
“The pod itself is far too voluminous to be heated, but your lab is a thermally insulated cinder-block room,
roughly a cube, located in the farthest corner of the pod for maximum separation.”
Katherine tried to picture it. A box inside a box. She strained to see into the darkness, but it was absolute.
“How far back?”
“Pretty far . . . a football field would fit easily in here. I should warn you, though, the walk is a little
unnerving. It’s exceptionally dark.”
Katherine peered tentatively around the corner. “No light switch?”
“Pod Five is not yet wired for electricity.”
“But . . . then how can a lab function?”
He winked. “Hydrogen fuel cell.”
Katherine’s jaw dropped. “You’re kidding, right?”
“Enough clean power to run a small town. Your lab enjoys full radio-frequency separation from the rest of
the building. What’s more, all pod exteriors are sealed with photo-resistant membranes to protect the artifacts
inside from solar radiation. Essentially, this pod is a sealed, energy-neutral environment.”
Katherine was starting to comprehend the appeal of Pod 5. Because much of her work centered on
quantifying previously unknown energy fields, her experiments needed to be performed in a location isolated
from any extraneous radiation or “white noise.” This included interference as subtle as “brain radiation” or
“thought emissions” generated by people nearby. For this reason, a university campus or hospital lab
wouldn’t work, but a deserted pod at the SMSC could not have been more perfect.
“Let’s go back and have a look.” Her brother was grinning as he stepped into the vast darkness. “Just follow
me.”
Katherine stalled at the threshold. Over a hundred yards in total darkness? She wanted to suggest a
flashlight, but her brother had already disappeared into the abyss.
“Peter?” she called.
“Leap of faith,” he called back, his voice already fading away. “You’ll find your way. Trust me.”
He’s kidding, right? Katherine’s heart was pounding as she stepped a few feet over the threshold, trying to
peer into the darkness. I can’t see a thing! Suddenly the steel door hissed and slammed shut behind her,
plunging her into total blackness. Not a speck of light anywhere. “Peter?!”
Silence.
You’ll find your way. Trust me.
Tentative, she inched forward blindly. Leap of faith? Katherine could not even see her hand directly in front
of her face. She kept moving forward, but within a matter of seconds, she was entirely lost. Where am I
going?
That was three years ago.
Now, as Katherine arrived at the same heavy metal door, she realized how far she had come since that first
night. Her lab—nicknamed the Cube—had become her home, a sanctuary within the depths of Pod 5.
Exactly as her brother had predicted, she had found her way through the darkness that night, and every day
since—thanks to an ingeniously simple guidance system that her brother had let her discover for herself.
Far more important, her brother’s other prediction had come true as well: Katherine’s experiments had
produced astonishing results, particularly in the last six months, breakthroughs that would alter entire
paradigms of thinking. Katherine and her brother had agreed to keep her results absolutely secret until the
implications were more fully understood. One day soon, however, Katherine knew she would publish some
of the most transformative scientific revelations in human history.
A secret lab in a secret museum, she thought, inserting her key card into the Pod 5 door. The keypad lit up,
and Katherine typed her PIN.
The steel door hissed open.
The familiar hollow moan was accompanied by the same blast of cold air. As always, Katherine felt her pulse
rate start to climb.
Strangest commute on earth.
Steeling herself for the journey, Katherine Solomon glanced at her watch as she stepped into the void.
Tonight, however, a troubled thought followed her inside. Where is Peter?
CHAPTER 12
Capitol police chief Trent Anderson had overseen security in the U.S. Capitol Complex for over a decade. A
burly, square-chested man with a chiseled face and red hair, he kept his hair cropped in a buzz cut, giving
him an air of military authority. He wore a visible sidearm as a warning to anyone foolish enough to question
the extent of his authority.
Anderson spent the majority of his time coordinating his small army of police officers from a high-tech
surveillance center in the basement of the Capitol. Here he oversaw a staff of technicians who watched visual
monitors, computer readouts, and a telephone switchboard that kept him in contact with the many security
personnel he commanded.
This evening had been unusually quiet, and Anderson was pleased. He had been hoping to catch a bit of the
Redskins game on the flat-panel television in his office. The game had just kicked off when his intercom
buzzed.
“Chief?”
Anderson groaned and kept his eyes on the television as he pressed the button. “Yeah.”
“We’ve got some kind of disturbance in the Rotunda. I’ve got officers arriving now, but I think you’ll want
to have a look.”
“Right.” Anderson walked into the security nerve center—a compact, neomodern facility packed with
computer monitors. “What have you got?”
The technician was cueing a digital video clip on his monitor. “Rotunda east balcony camera. Twenty
seconds ago.” He played the clip.
Anderson watched over the technician’s shoulder.
The Rotunda was almost deserted today, dotted with just a few tourists. Anderson’s trained eye went
immediately to the one person who was alone and moving faster than all the others. Shaved head. Green
army-surplus jacket. Injured arm in a sling. Slight limp. Slouched posture. Talking on a cell phone.
The bald man’s footfalls echoed crisply on the audio feed until, suddenly, arriving at the exact center of the
Rotunda, he stopped short, ended his phone call, and then knelt down as if to tie his shoe. But instead of
tying a shoe, he pulled something out of his sling and set it on the floor. Then he stood up and limped briskly
toward the east exit.
Anderson eyed the oddly shaped object the man had left behind. What in the world? It was about eight inches
tall and standing vertically. Anderson crouched closer to the screen and squinted. That can’t be what it looks
like!
As the bald man hurried off, disappearing through the east portico, a little boy nearby could be heard saying,
“Mommy, that man dropped something.” The boy drifted toward the object but suddenly stopped short. After
a long, motionless beat, he pointed and let out a deafening scream.
Instantly, the police chief spun and ran for the door, barking orders as he went. “Radio all points! Find the
bald guy with the sling and detain him! NOW!”
Dashing out of the security center, he bounded up the treads of the well-worn staircase three at a time. The
security feed had shown the bald man with the sling leave the Rotunda via the east portico. The shortest route
out of the building would therefore take him through the east-west corridor, which was just ahead.
I can head him off.
As he reached the top of the stairs and rounded the corner, Anderson surveyed the quiet hallway before him.
An elderly couple strolled at the far end, hand in hand. Nearby, a blond tourist wearing a blue blazer was
reading a guidebook and studying the mosaic ceiling outside the House chamber.
“Excuse me, sir!” Anderson barked, running toward him. “Have you seen a bald man with a sling on his
arm?”
The man looked up from his book with a confused expression.
“A bald man with a sling!” Anderson repeated more firmly. “Have you seen him?”
The tourist hesitated and glanced nervously toward the far eastern end of the hallway. “Uh . . . yes,” he said.
“I think he just ran past me . . . to that staircase over there.” He pointed down the hall.
Anderson pulled out his radio and yelled into it. “All points! The suspect is headed for the southeast exit.
Converge!” He stowed the radio and yanked his sidearm from its holster, running toward the exit.
Thirty seconds later, at a quiet exit on the east side of the Capitol, the powerfully built blond man in the blue
blazer stepped into the damp night air. He smiled, savoring the coolness of the evening.
Transformation.
It had been so easy.
Only a minute ago he had limped quickly out of the Rotunda in an army-surplus coat. Stepping into a
darkened alcove, he shed his coat, revealing the blue blazer he wore underneath. Before abandoning his
surplus jacket, he pulled a blond wig from the pocket and fit it snugly on his head. Then he stood up straight,
pulled a slim Washington guidebook from his blazer, and stepped calmly from the niche with an elegant gait.
Transformation. This is my gift.
As Mal’akh’s mortal legs carried him toward his waiting limousine, he arched his back, standing to his full
six-foot-three height and throwing back his shoulders. He inhaled deeply, letting the air fill his lungs. He
could feel the wings of the tattooed phoenix on his chest opening wide.
If they only knew my power, he thought, gazing out at the city. Tonight my transformation will be complete.
Mal’akh had played his cards artfully within the Capitol Building, showing obeisance to all the ancient
etiquettes. The ancient invitation has been delivered. If Langdon had not yet grasped his role here tonight,
soon he would.
CHAPTER 13
For Robert Langdon, the Capitol Rotunda—like St. Peter's Basilica—always had a way of taking him by
surprise. Intellectually, he knew the room was so large that the Statue of Liberty could stand comfortably
inside it, but somehow the Rotunda always felt larger and more hallowed than he anticipated, as if there were
spirits in the air. Tonight, however, there was only chaos.
Capitol police officers were sealing the Rotunda while attempting to herd distraught tourists away from the
hand. The little boy was still crying. A bright light flashed—a tourist taking a photo of the hand—and several
guards immediately detained the man, taking his camera and escorting him off. In the confusion, Langdon
felt himself moving forward in a trance, slipping through the crowd, inching closer to the hand.
Peter Solomon's severed right hand was standing upright, the flat plane of the detached wrist skewered down
onto the spike of a small wooden stand. Three of the fingers were closed in a fist, while the thumb and index
finger were fully extended, pointing up toward the soaring dome.
“Everyone back!” an officer called.
Langdon was close enough now that he could see dried blood, which had run down from the wrist and
coagulated on the wooden base. Postmortem wounds don't bleed . . . which means Peter is alive. Langdon
didn't know whether to be relieved or nauseated. Peter's hand was removed while he was alive? Bile rose in
his throat. He thought of all the times his dear friend had extended this same hand to shake Langdon's or
offer a warm embrace.
For several seconds, Langdon felt his mind go blank, like an untuned television set broadcasting only static.
The first clear image that broke through was utterly unexpected.
A crown . . . and a star.
Langdon crouched down, eyeing the tips of Peter's thumb and index finger. Tattoos? Incredibly, the monster
who had done this appeared to have tattooed tiny symbols on Peter's fingertips.
On the thumb—a crown. On the index finger—a star.
This can't be. The two symbols registered instantly in Langdon's mind, amplifying this already horrific scene
into something almost otherworldly. These symbols had appeared together many times in history, and always
in the same place—on the fingertips of a hand. It was one of the ancient world's most coveted and secretive
icons.
The Hand of the Mysteries.
The icon was rarely seen anymore, but throughout history it had symbolized a powerful call to action.
Langdon strained to comprehend the grotesque artifact now before him. Someone crafted the Hand of the
Mysteries out of Peter's hand? It was unthinkable. Traditionally, the icon was sculpted in stone or wood or
rendered as a drawing. Langdon had never heard of the Hand of the Mysteries being fashioned from actual
flesh. The concept was abhorrent.
“Sir?” a guard said behind Langdon. “Please step back.”
Langdon barely heard him. There are other tattoos. Although he could not see the fingertips of the three
clenched fingers, Langdon knew these fingertips would bear their own unique markings. That was the
tradition. Five symbols in total. Through the millennia, the symbols on the fingertips of the Hand of the
Mysteries had never changed . . . nor had the hand's iconic purpose.
The hand represents . . . an invitation.
Langdon felt a sudden chill as he recalled the words of the man who had brought him here. Professor, tonight
you are receiving the invitation of your lifetime. In ancient times, the Hand of the Mysteries actually served
as the most coveted invitation on earth. To receive this icon was a sacred summons to join an elite group—
those who were said to guard the secret wisdom of all the ages. The invitation not only was a great honor, but
it signified that a master believed you were worthy to receive this hidden wisdom. The hand of the master
extended to the initiate.
“Sir,” the guard said, putting a firm hand on Langdon's shoulder. “I need you to back up right now.”
“I know what this means,” Langdon managed. “I can help you.”
“Now!” the guard said.
“My friend is in trouble. We have to—”
Langdon felt powerful arms pulling him up and leading him away from the hand. He simply let it happen . . .
feeling too off balance to protest.
A formal invitation had just been delivered. Someone was summoning Langdon to unlock a mystical portal
that would unveil a world of ancient mysteries and hidden knowledge.
But it was all madness.
Delusions of a lunatic.
CHAPTER 14
Mal’akh’s stretch limousine eased away from the U.S. Capitol, moving eastward down Independence
Avenue. A young couple on the sidewalk strained to see through the tinted rear windows, hoping to glimpse
a VIP.
I’m in front, Mal’akh thought, smiling to himself.
Mal’akh loved the feeling of power he got from driving this massive car all alone. None of his other five cars
offered him what he needed tonight—the guarantee of privacy. Total privacy. Limousines in this city
enjoyed a kind of unspoken immunity. Embassies on wheels. Police officers who worked near Capitol Hill
were never certain what power broker they might mistakenly pull over in a limousine, and so most simply
chose not to take the chance.
As Mal’akh crossed the Anacostia River into Maryland, he could feel himself moving closer to Katherine,
pulled onward by destiny’s gravity. I am being called to a second task tonight . . . one I had not imagined.
Last night, when Peter Solomon told the last of his secrets, Mal’akh had learned of the existence of a secret
lab in which Katherine Solomon had performed miracles—staggering breakthroughs that Mal’akh realized
would change the world if they were ever made known.
Her work will unveil the true nature of all things.
For centuries the “brightest minds” on earth had ignored the ancient sciences, mocking them as ignorant
superstitions, arming themselves instead with smug skepticism and dazzling new technologies—tools that led
them only further from the truth. Every generation’s breakthroughs are proven false by the next generation’s
technology. And so it had gone through the ages. The more man learned, the more he realized he did not
know.
For millennia, mankind had wandered in the darkness . . . but now, as had been prophesied, there was a
change coming. After hurtling blindly through history, mankind had reached a crossroads. This moment had
been predicted long ago, prophesied by the ancient texts, by the primeval calendars, and even by the stars
themselves. The date was specific, its arrival imminent. It would be preceded by a brilliant explosion of
knowledge . . . a flash of clarity to illuminate the darkness and give mankind a final chance to veer away
from the abyss and take the path of wisdom.
I have come to obscure the light, Mal’akh thought. This is my role.
Fate had linked him to Peter and Katherine Solomon. The breakthroughs Katherine Solomon had made
within the SMSC would risk opening floodgates of new thinking, starting a new Renaissance. Katherine’s
revelations, if made public, would become a catalyst that would inspire mankind to rediscover the knowledge
he had lost, empowering him beyond all imagination.
Katherine’s destiny is to light this torch.
Mine is to extinguish it.
CHAPTER 15
In total darkness, Katherine Solomon groped for the outer door of her lab. Finding it, she heaved open the
lead-lined door and hurried into the small entry room. The journey across the void had taken only ninety
seconds, and yet her heart was pounding wildly. After three years, you’d think I’d be used to that. Katherine
always felt relieved to escape the blackness of Pod 5 and step into this clean, well-lit space.
The “Cube” was a massive windowless box. Every inch of the interior walls and ceiling was covered with a
stiff mesh of titanium-coated lead fiber, giving the impression of a giant cage built inside a cement enclosure.
Dividers of frosted Plexiglas separated the space into different compartments—a laboratory, a control room,
a mechanical room, a bathroom, and a small research library.
Katherine strode briskly into the main lab. The bright and sterile work space glistened with advanced
quantitative equipment: paired electro encephalographs, a femtosecond comb, a magneto-optical trap, and
quantum-indeterminate electronic noise REGs, more simply known as Random Event Generators.
Despite Noetic Science’s use of cutting-edge technologies, the discoveries themselves were far more
mystical than the cold, high-tech machines that were producing them. The stuff of magic and myth was fast
becoming reality as the shocking new data poured in, all of it supporting the basic ideology of Noetic
Science—the untapped potential of the human mind.
The overall thesis was simple: We have barely scratched the surface of our mental and spiritual capabilities.
Experiments at facilities like the Institute of Noetic Sciences (IONS) in California and the Princeton
Engineering Anomalies Research Lab (PEAR) had categorically proven that human thought, if properly
focused, had the ability to affect and change physical mass. Their experiments were no “spoon-bending”
parlor tricks, but rather highly controlled inquiries that all produced the same extraordinary result: our
thoughts actually interacted with the physical world, whether or not we knew it, effecting change all the way
down to the subatomic realm.
Mind over matter.
In 2001, in the hours following the horrifying events of September 11, the field of Noetic Science made a
quantum leap forward. Four scientists discovered that as the frightened world came together and focused in
shared grief on this single tragedy, the outputs of thirty-seven different Random Event Generators around the
world suddenly became significantly less random. Somehow, the oneness of this shared experience, the
coalescing of millions of minds, had affected the randomizing function of these machines, organizing their
outputs and bringing order from chaos.
The shocking discovery, it seemed, paralleled the ancient spiritual belief in a “cosmic consciousness”—a vast
coalescing of human intention that was actually capable of interacting with physical matter. Recently, studies
in mass meditation and prayer had produced similar results in Random Event Generators, fueling the claim
that human consciousness, as Noetic author Lynne McTaggart described it, was a substance outside the
confines of the body . . . a highly ordered energy capable of changing the physical world. Katherine had been
fascinated by McTaggart’s book The Intention Experiment, and her global, Web-based study—
theintentionexperiment.com—aimed at discovering how human intention could affect the world. A handful
of other progressive texts had also piqued Katherine’s interest.
From this foundation, Katherine Solomon’s research had vaulted forward, proving that “focused thought”
could affect literally anything—the growth rate of plants, the direction that fish swam in a bowl, the manner
in which cells divided in a petri dish, the synchronization of separately automated systems, and the chemical
reactions in one’s own body. Even the crystalline structure of a newly forming solid was rendered mutable by
one’s mind; Katherine had created beautifully symmetrical ice crystals by sending loving thoughts to a glass
of water as it froze. Incredibly, the converse was also true: when she sent negative, polluting thoughts to the
water, the ice crystals froze in chaotic, fractured forms.
Human thought can literally transform the physical world.
As Katherine’s experiments grew bolder, her results became more astounding. Her work in this lab had
proven beyond the shadow of a doubt that “mind over matter” was not just some New Age self-help mantra.
The mind had the ability to alter the state of matter itself, and, more important, the mind had the power to
encourage the physical world to move in a specific direction.
We are the masters of our own universe.
At the subatomic level, Katherine had shown that particles themselves came in and out of existence based
solely on her intention to observe them. In a sense, her desire to see a particle . . . manifested that particle.
Heisenberg had hinted at this reality decades ago, and now it had be come a fundamental principle of Noetic
Science. In the words of Lynne McTaggart: “Living consciousness somehow is the influence that turns the
possibility of something into something real. The most essential ingredient in creating our universe is the
consciousness that observes it.”
The most astonishing aspect of Katherine’s work, however, had been the realization that the mind’s ability to
affect the physical world could be augmented through practice. Intention was a learned skill. Like
meditation, harnessing the true power of “thought” required practice. More important . . . some people were
born more skilled at it than others. And throughout history, there had been those few who had become true
masters.
This is the missing link between modern science and ancient mysticism.
Katherine had learned this from her brother, Peter, and now, as her thoughts turned back to him, she felt a
deepening concern. She walked to the lab’s research library and peered in. Empty.
The library was a small reading room—two Morris chairs, a wooden table, two floor lamps, and a wall of
mahogany bookshelves that held some five hundred books. Katherine and Peter had pooled their favorite
texts here, writings on everything from particle physics to ancient mysticism. Their collection had grown into
an eclectic fusion of new and old . . . of cutting-edge and historical. Most of Katherine’s books bore titles like
Quantum Consciousness, The New Physics, and Principles of Neural Science. Her brother’s bore older, more
esoteric titles like the Kybalion, the Zohar, The Dancing Wu Li Masters, and a translation of the Sumerian
tablets from the British Museum.
“The key to our scientific future,” her brother often said, “is hidden in our past.” A lifelong scholar of
history, science, and mysticism, Peter had been the first to encourage Katherine to boost her university
science education with an understanding of early Hermetic philosophy. She had been only nineteen years old
when Peter sparked her interest in the link between modern science and ancient mysticism.
“So tell me, Kate,” her brother had asked while she was home on vacation during her sophomore year at
Yale. “What are Elis reading these days in theoretical physics?”
Katherine had stood in her family’s book-filled library and recited her demanding reading list.
“Impressive,” her brother replied. “Einstein, Bohr, and Hawking are modern geniuses. But are you reading
anything older?”
Katherine scratched her head. “You mean like . . . Newton?”
He smiled. “Keep going.” At twenty-seven, Peter had already made a name for himself in the academic
world, and he and Katherine had grown to savor this kind of playful intellectual sparring.
Older than Newton? Katherine’s head now filled with distant names like Ptolemy, Pythagoras, and Hermes
Trismegistus. Nobody reads that stuff anymore.
Her brother ran a finger down the long shelf of cracked leather bindings and old dusty tomes. “The scientific
wisdom of the ancients was staggering . . . modern physics is only now beginning to comprehend it all.”
“Peter,” she said, “you already told me that the Egyptians understood levers and pulleys long before Newton,
and that the early alchemists did work on a par with modern chemistry, but so what? Today’s physics deals
with concepts that would have been unimaginable to the ancients.”
“Like what?”
“Well . . . like entanglement theory, for one!” Subatomic research had now proven categorically that all
matter was interconnected . . . entangled in a single unified mesh . . . a kind of universal oneness. “You’re
telling me the ancients sat around discussing entanglement theory?”
“Absolutely!” Peter said, pushing his long, dark bangs out of his eyes. “Entanglement was at the core of
primeval beliefs. Its names are as old as history itself . . . Dharmakaya, Tao, Brahman. In fact, man’s oldest
spiritual quest was to perceive his own entanglement, to sense his own interconnection with all things. He
has always wanted to become ‘one’ with the universe . . . to achieve the state of ‘at-one-ment.’ ” Her brother
raised his eyebrows. “To this day, Jews and Christians still strive for ‘atonement’ . . . although most of us
have forgotten it is actually ‘at-one-ment’ we’re seeking.”
Katherine sighed, having forgotten how hard it was to argue with a man so well versed in history. “Okay, but
you’re talking in generalities. I’m talking specific physics.”
“Then be specific.” His keen eyes challenged her now.
“Okay, how about something as simple as polarity—the positive/negative balance of the subatomic realm.
Obviously, the ancients didn’t underst—”
“Hold on!” Her brother pulled down a large dusty text, which he dropped loudly on the library table.
“Modern polarity is nothing but the ‘dual world’ described by Krishna here in the Bhagavad Gita over two
thousand years ago. A dozen other books in here, including the Kybalion, talk about binary systems and the
opposing forces in nature.”
Katherine was skeptical. “Okay, but if we talk about modern discoveries in subatomics—the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle, for example—”
“Then we must look here,” Peter said, striding down his long bookshelf and pulling out another text. “The
sacred Hindu Vendantic scriptures known as the Upanishads.” He dropped the tome heavily on the first.
“Heisenberg and Schrödinger studied this text and credited it with helping them formulate some of their
theories.”
The showdown continued for several minutes, and the stack of dusty books on the desk grew taller and taller.
Finally Katherine threw up her hands in frustration. “Okay! You made your point, but I want to study
cutting-edge theoretical physics. The future of science! I really doubt Krishna or Vyasa had much to say
about superstring theory and multidimensional cosmological models.”
“You’re right. They didn’t.” Her brother paused, a smile crossing his lips. “If you’re talking superstring
theory . . .” He wandered over to the bookshelf yet again. “Then you’re talking this book here.” He heaved
out a colossal leather-bound book and dropped it with a crash onto the desk. “Thirteenth-century translation
of the original medieval Aramaic.”
“Superstring theory in the thirteenth century?!” Katherine wasn’t buying it. “Come on!”
Superstring theory was a brand-new cosmological model. Based on the most recent scientific observations, it
suggested the multidimensional universe was made up not of three . . . but rather of ten dimensions, which all
interacted like vibrating strings, similar to resonating violin strings.
Katherine waited as her brother heaved open the book, ran through the ornately printed table of contents, and
then flipped to a spot near the beginning of the book. “Read this.” He pointed to a faded page of text and
diagrams.
Dutifully, Katherine studied the page. The translation was old-fashioned and very hard to read, but to her
utter amazement, the text and drawings clearly outlined the exact same universe heralded by modern
superstring theory—a ten-dimensional universe of resonating strings. As she continued reading, she suddenly
gasped and recoiled. “My God, it even describes how six of the dimensions are entangled and act as one?!”
She took a frightened step backward. “What is this book?!”
Her brother grinned. “Something I’m hoping you’ll read one day.” He flipped back to the title page, where an
ornately printed plate bore three words.
The Complete Zohar.
Although Katherine had never read the Zohar, she knew it was the fundamental text of early Jewish
mysticism, once believed so potent that it was reserved only for the most erudite rabbis.
Katherine eyed the book. “You’re saying the early mystics knew their universe had ten dimensions?”
“Absolutely.” He motioned to the page’s illustration of ten intertwined circles called Sephiroth. “Obviously,
the nomenclature is esoteric, but the physics is very advanced.”
Katherine didn’t know how to respond. “But . . . then why don’t more people study this?”
Her brother smiled. “They will.”
“I don’t understand.”
“Katherine, we have been born into wonderful times. A change is coming. Human beings are poised on the
threshold of a new age when they will begin turning their eyes back to nature and to the old ways . . . back to
the ideas in books like the Zohar and other ancient texts from around the world. Powerful truth has its own
gravity and eventually pulls people back to it. There will come a day when modern science begins in earnest
to study the wisdom of the ancients . . . that will be the day that mankind begins to find answers to the big
questions that still elude him.”
That night, Katherine eagerly began reading her brother’s ancient texts and quickly came to understand that
he was right. The ancients possessed profound scientific wisdom. Today’s science was not so much making
“discoveries” as it was making “rediscoveries.” Mankind, it seemed, had once grasped the true nature of the
universe . . . but had let go . . . and forgotten.
Modern physics can help us remember! This quest had become Katherine’s mission in life—to use advanced
science to rediscover the lost wisdom of the ancients. It was more than academic thrill that kept her
motivated. Beneath it all was her conviction that the world needed this understanding . . . now more than
ever.
At the rear of the lab, Katherine saw her brother’s white lab coat hanging on its hook along with her own.
Reflexively, she pulled out her phone to check for messages. Nothing. A voice echoed again in her memory.
That which your brother believes is hidden in D.C. . . . it can be found. Sometimes a legend that endures for
centuries . . . endures for a reason.
“No,” Katherine said aloud. “It can’t possibly be real.”
Sometimes a legend was just that—a legend.
CHAPTER 16
Security chief Trent Anderson stormed back toward the Capitol Rotunda, fuming at the failure of his
security team. One of his men had just found a sling and an army-surplus jacket in an alcove near the east
portico.
The goddamn guy walked right out of here!
Anderson had already assigned teams to start scanning exterior video, but by the time they found anything,
this guy would be long gone.
Now, as Anderson entered the Rotunda to survey the damage, he saw that the situation had been contained as
well as could be expected. All four entrances to the Rotunda were closed with as inconspicuous a method of
crowd control as Security had at its disposal—a velvet swag, an apologetic guard, and a sign that read THIS
ROOM TEMPORARILY CLOSED FOR CLEANING. The dozen or so witnesses were all being herded
into a group on the eastern perimeter of the room, where the guards were collecting cell phones and cameras;
the last thing Anderson needed was for one of these people to send a cell-phone snapshot to CNN.
One of the detained witnesses, a tall, dark-haired man in a tweed sport coat, was trying to break away from
the group to speak to the chief. The man was currently in a heated discussion with the guards.
“I’ll speak to him in a moment,” Anderson called over to the guards. “For now, please hold everyone in the
main lobby until we sort this out.”
Anderson turned his eyes now to the hand, which stood at attention in the middle of the room. For the love of
God. In fifteen years on security detail for the Capitol Building, he had seen some strange things. But nothing
like this.
Forensics had better get here fast and get this thing out of my building.
Anderson moved closer, seeing that the bloody wrist had been skewered on a spiked wooden base to make
the hand stand up. Wood and flesh, he thought. Invisible to metal detectors. The only metal was a large gold
ring, which Anderson assumed had either been wanded or casually pulled off the dead finger by the suspect
as if it were his own.
Anderson crouched down to examine the hand. It looked as if it had belonged to a man of about sixty. The
ring bore some kind of ornate seal with a two-headed bird and the number 33. Anderson didn’t recognize it.
What really caught his eye were the tiny tattoos on the tips of the thumb and index finger.
A goddamn freak show.
“Chief?” One of the guards hurried over, holding out a phone. “Personal call for you. Security switchboard
just patched it through.”
Anderson looked at him like he was insane. “I’m in the middle of something here,” he growled.
The guard’s face was pale. He covered the mouthpiece and whispered. “It’s CIA.”
Anderson did a double take. CIA heard about this already?!
“It’s their Office of Security.”
Anderson stiffened. Holy shit. He glanced uneasily at the phone in the guard’s hand.
In Washington’s vast ocean of intelligence agencies, the CIA’s Office of Security was something of a
Bermuda Triangle—a mysterious and treacherous region from which all who knew of it steered clear
whenever possible. With a seemingly self-destructive mandate, the OS had been created by the CIA for one
strange purpose—to spy on the CIA itself. Like a powerful internal-affairs office, the OS monitored all CIA
employees for illicit behavior: misappropriation of funds, selling of secrets, stealing classified technologies,
and use of illegal torture tactics, to name a few.
They spy on America’s spies.
With investigative carte blanche in all matters of national security, the OS had a long and potent reach.
Anderson could not fathom why they would be interested in this incident at the Capitol, or how they had
found out so fast. Then again, the OS was rumored to have eyes everywhere. For all Anderson knew, they
had a direct feed of U.S. Capitol security cameras. This incident did not match OS directives in any way,
although the timing of the call seemed too coincidental to Anderson to be about anything other than this
severed hand.
“Chief?”The guard was holding the phone out to him like a hot potato. “You need to take this call right now.
It’s . . .” He paused and silently mouthed two syllables. “SA-TO.”
Anderson squinted hard at the man. You’ve got to be kidding. He felt his palms begin to sweat. Sato is
handling this personally?
The overlord of the Office of Security—Director Inoue Sato—was a legend in the intelligence community.
Born inside the fences of a Japanese internment camp in Manzanar, California, in the aftermath of Pearl
Harbor, Sato was a toughened survivor who had never forgotten the horrors of war, or the perils of
insufficient military intelligence. Now, having risen to one of the most secretive and potent posts in U.S.
intelligence work, Sato had proven an uncompromising patriot as well as a terrifying enemy to any who
stood in opposition. Seldom seen but universally feared, the OS director cruised the deep waters of the CIA
like a leviathan who surfaced only to devour its prey.
Anderson had met Sato face-to-face only once, and the memory of looking into those cold black eyes was
enough to make him count his blessings that he would be having this conversation by telephone.
Anderson took the phone and brought it to his lips. “Director Sato,” he said in as friendly a voice as possible.
“This is Chief Anderson. How may I—”
“There is a man in your building to whom I need to speak immediately.” The OS director’s voice was
unmistakable—like gravel grating on a chalkboard. Throat cancer surgery had left Sato with a profoundly
unnerving intonation and a repulsive neck scar to match. “I want you to find him for me immediately.”
That’s all? You want me to page someone? Anderson felt suddenly hopeful that maybe the timing of this call
was pure coincidence. “Who are you looking for?”
“His name is Robert Langdon. I believe he is inside your building right now.”
Langdon? The name sounded vaguely familiar, but Anderson couldn’t quite place it. He was now wondering
if Sato knew about the hand. “I’m in the Rotunda at the moment,” Anderson said, “but we’ve got some
tourists here . . . hold on.” He lowered his phone and called out to the group, “Folks, is there anyone here by
the name of Langdon?”
After a short silence, a deep voice replied from the crowd of tourists. “Yes. I’m Robert Langdon.”
Sato knows all. Anderson craned his neck, trying to see who had spoken up.
The same man who had been trying to get to him earlier stepped away from the others. He looked distraught .
. . but familiar somehow.
Anderson raised the phone to his lips. “Yes, Mr. Langdon is here.”
“Put him on,” Sato said coarsely.
Anderson exhaled. Better him than me. “Hold on.” He waved Langdon over. As Langdon approached,
Anderson suddenly realized why the name sounded familiar. I just read an article about this guy. What the
hell is he doing here?
Despite Langdon’s six-foot frame and athletic build, Anderson saw none of the cold, hardened edge he
expected from a man famous for surviving an explosion at the Vatican and a manhunt in Paris. This guy
eluded the French police . . . in loafers? He looked more like someone Anderson would expect to find
hearthside in some Ivy League library reading Dostoyevsky.
“Mr. Langdon?”Anderson said, walking halfway to meet him. “I’m Chief Anderson. I handle security here.
You have a phone call.”
“For me?” Langdon’s blue eyes looked anxious and uncertain.
Anderson held out the phone. “It’s the CIA’s Office of Security.”
“I’ve never heard of it.”
Anderson smiled ominously. “Well, sir, it’s heard of you.”
Langdon put the phone to his ear. “Yes?”
“Robert Langdon?” Director Sato’s harsh voice blared in the tiny speaker, loud enough that Anderson could
hear.
“Yes?” Langdon replied.
Anderson stepped closer to hear what Sato was saying.
“This is Director Inoue Sato, Mr. Langdon. I am handling a crisis at the moment, and I believe you have
information that can help me.”
Langdon looked hopeful. “Is this about Peter Solomon? Do you know where he is?!”
Peter Solomon? Anderson felt entirely out of the loop.
“Professor,” Sato replied. “I am asking the questions at the moment.”
“Peter Solomon is in very serious trouble,” Langdon exclaimed. “Some madman just—”
“Excuse me,” Sato said, cutting him off.
Anderson cringed. Bad move. Interrupting a top CIA official’s line of questioning was a mistake only a
civilian would make. I thought Langdon was supposed to be smart.
“Listen carefully,” Sato said. “As we speak, this nation is facing a crisis. I have been advised that you have
information that can help me avert it. Now, I am going to ask you again. What information do you possess?”
Langdon looked lost. “Director, I have no idea what you’re talking about. All I’m concerned with is finding
Peter and—”
“No idea?” Sato challenged.
Anderson saw Langdon bristle. The professor now took a more aggressive tone. “No, sir. No damned idea at
all.” Anderson winced. Wrong. Wrong. Wrong. Robert Langdon had just made a very costly mistake in
dealing with Director Sato.
Incredibly, Anderson now realized it was too late. To his astonishment, Director Sato had just appeared on
the far side of the Rotunda, and was approaching fast behind Langdon. Sato is in the building! Anderson held
his breath and braced for impact. Langdon has no idea.
The director’s dark form drew closer, phone held to ear, black eyes locked like two lasers on Langdon’s
back.
Langdon clutched the police chief’s phone and felt a rising frustration as the OS director pressed him. “I’m
sorry, sir,” Langdon said tersely, “but I can’t read your mind. What do you want from me?”
“What do I want from you?” The OS director’s grating voice crackled through Langdon’s phone, scraping
and hollow, like that of a dying man with strep throat.
As the man spoke, Langdon felt a tap on his shoulder. He turned and his eyes were drawn down . . . directly
into the face of a tiny Japanese woman. She had a fierce expression, a mottled complexion, thinning hair,
tobacco-stained teeth, and an unsettling white scar that sliced horizontally across her neck. The woman’s
gnarled hand held a cell phone to her ear, and when her lips moved, Langdon heard the familiar raspy voice
through his cell phone.
“What do I want from you, Professor?” She calmly closed her phone and glared at him. “For starters, you can
stop calling me ‘sir.’ ”
Langdon stared, mortified. “Ma’am, I . . . apologize. Our connection was poor and—”
“Our connection was fine, Professor,” she said. “And I have an extremely low tolerance for bullshit.”
CHAPTER 17
Director Inoue Sato was a fearsome specimen—a bristly tempest of a woman who stood a mere four feet
ten inches. She was bone thin, with jagged features and a dermatological condition known as vitiligo, which
gave her complexion the mottled look of coarse granite blotched with lichen. Her rumpled blue pantsuit hung
on her emaciated frame like a loose sack, the open-necked blouse doing nothing to hide the scar across her
neck. It had been noted by her coworkers that Sato’s only acquiescence to physical vanity appeared to be that
of plucking her substantial mustache.
For over a decade, Inoue Sato had overseen the CIA’s Office of Security. She possessed an off-the-chart IQ
and chillingly accurate instincts, a combination which girded her with a self-confidence that made her
terrifying to anyone who could not perform the impossible. Not even a terminal diagnosis of aggressive
throat cancer had knocked her from her perch. The battle had cost her one month of work, half her voice box,
and a third of her body weight, but she returned to the office as if nothing had happened. Inoue Sato appeared
to be indestructible.
Robert Langdon suspected he was probably not the first to mistake Sato for a man on the phone, but the
director was still glaring at him with simmering black eyes.
“Again, my apologies, ma’am,” Langdon said. “I’m still trying to get my bearings here—the person who
claims to have Peter Solomon tricked me into coming to D.C. this evening.” He pulled the fax from his
jacket. “This is what he sent me earlier. I wrote down the tail number of the plane he sent, so maybe if you
call the FAA and track the—”
Sato’s tiny hand shot out and snatched the sheet of paper. She stuck it in her pocket without even opening it.
“Professor, I am running this investigation, and until you start telling me what I want to know, I suggest you
not speak unless spoken to.”
Sato now spun to the police chief.
“Chief Anderson,” she said, stepping entirely too close and staring up at him through tiny black eyes, “would
you care to tell me what the hell is going on here? The guard at the east gate told me you found a human
hand on the floor. Is that true?”
Anderson stepped to the side and revealed the object in the center of the floor. “Yes, ma’am, only a few
minutes ago.”
She glanced at the hand as if it were nothing more than a misplaced piece of clothing. “And yet you didn’t
mention it to me when I called?”
“I . . . I thought you knew.”
“Do not lie to me.”
Anderson wilted under her gaze, but his voice remained confident. “Ma’am, this situation is under control.”
“I really doubt that,” Sato said, with equal confidence.
“A forensics team is on the way. Whoever did this may have left fingerprints.”
Sato looked skeptical. “I think someone clever enough to walk through your security checkpoint with a
human hand is probably clever enough not to leave fingerprints.”
“That may be true, but I have a responsibility to investigate.”
“Actually, I am relieving you of your responsibility as of this moment. I’m taking over.”
Anderson stiffened. “This is not exactly OS domain, is it?”
“Absolutely. This is an issue of national security.”
Peter’s hand? Langdon wondered, watching their exchange in a daze. National security? Langdon was
sensing that his own urgent goal of finding Peter was not Sato’s. The OS director seemed to be on another
page entirely.
Anderson looked puzzled as well. “National security? With all due respect, ma’am—”
“The last I checked,” she interrupted, “I outrank you. I suggest you do exactly as I say, and that you do it
without question.”
Anderson nodded and swallowed hard. “But shouldn’t we at least print the fingers to confirm the hand
belongs to Peter Solomon?”
“I’ll confirm it,” Langdon said, feeling a sickening certainty. “I recognize his ring . . . and his hand.” He
paused. “The tattoos are new, though. Someone did that to him recently.”
“I’m sorry?” Sato looked unnerved for the first time since arriving. “The hand is tattooed?”
Langdon nodded. “The thumb has a crown. And the index finger a star.”
Sato pulled out a pair of glasses and walked toward the hand, circling like a shark.
“Also,” Langdon said, “although you can’t see the other three fingers, I’m certain they will have tattoos on
the fingertips as well.”
Sato looked intrigued by the comment and motioned to Anderson. “Chief, can you look at the other fingertips
for us, please?”
Anderson crouched down beside the hand, being careful not to touch it. He put his cheek near the floor and
looked up under the clenched fingertips. “He’s right, ma’am. All of the fingertips have tattoos, although I
can’t quite see what the other—”
“A sun, a lantern, and a key,” Langdon said flatly.
Sato turned fully to Langdon now, her small eyes appraising him. “And how exactly would you know that?”
Langdon stared back. “The image of a human hand, marked in this way on the fingertips, is a very old icon.
It’s known as ‘the Hand of the Mysteries.’ ”
Anderson stood up abruptly. “This thing has a name?”
Langdon nodded. “It’s one of the most secretive icons of the ancient world.”
Sato cocked her head. “Then might I ask what the hell it’s doing in the middle of the U.S. Capitol?”
Langdon wished he would wake up from this nightmare. “Traditionally, ma’am, it was used as an invitation.”
“An invitation . . . to what?” she demanded.
Langdon looked down at the symbols on his friend’s severed hand. “For centuries, the Hand of the Mysteries
served as a mystical summons. Basically, it’s an invitation to receive secret knowledge—protected wisdom
known only to an elite few.”
Sato folded her thin arms and stared up at him with jet-black eyes. “Well, Professor, for someone who claims
to have no clue why he’s here . . . you’re doing quite well so far.”
CHAPTER 18
Katherine Solomon donned her white lab coat and began her usual arrival routine—her “rounds” as her
brother called them.
Like a nervous parent checking on a sleeping baby, Katherine poked her head into the mechanical room. The
hydrogen fuel cell was running smoothly, its backup tanks all safely nestled in their racks.
Katherine continued down the hall to the data-storage room. As always, the two redundant holographic
backup units hummed safely within their temperature-controlled vault. All of my research, she thought,
gazing in through the three-inch-thick shatterproof glass. Holographic data-storage devices, unlike their
refrigerator-size ancestors, looked more like sleek stereo components, each perched atop a columnar
pedestal.
Both of her lab’s holographic drives were synchronized and identical—serving as redundant backups to
safeguard identical copies of her work. Most backup protocols advocated a secondary backup system off-site
in case of earthquake, fire, or theft, but Katherine and her brother agreed that secrecy was paramount; once
this data left the building to an off-site server, they could no longer be certain it would stay private.
Content that everything was running smoothly here, she headed back down the hallway. As she rounded the
corner, however, she spotted something unexpected across the lab. What in the world? A muted glow was
glinting off all the equipment. She hurried in to have a look, surprised to see light emanating from behind the
Plexiglas wall of the control room.
He’s here. Katherine flew across the lab, arriving at the control-room door and heaving it open. “Peter!” she
said, running in. The plump woman seated at the control room’s terminal jumped up. “Oh my God!
Katherine! You scared me!”
Trish Dunne—the only other person on earth allowed back here—was Katherine’s metasystems analyst and
seldom worked weekends. The twenty-six-year-old redhead was a genius data modeler and had signed a
nondisclosure document worthy of the KGB. Tonight, she was apparently analyzing data on the control
room’s plasma wall—a huge flat-screen display that looked like something out of NASA mission control.
“Sorry,” Trish said. “I didn’t know you were here yet. I was trying to finish up before you and your brother
arrived.”
“Have you spoken to him? He’s late and he’s not answering his phone.”
Trish shook her head. “I bet he’s still trying to figure out how to use that new iPhone you gave him.”
Katherine appreciated Trish’s good humor, and Trish’s presence here had just given her an idea. “Actually,
I’m glad you’re in tonight. You might be able to help me with something, if you don’t mind?”
“Whatever it is, I’m sure it beats football.”
Katherine took a deep breath, calming her mind. “I’m not sure how to explain this, but earlier today, I heard
an unusual story . . .”
Trish Dunne didn’t know what story Katherine Solomon had heard, but clearly it had her on edge. Her boss’s
usually calm gray eyes looked anxious, and she had tucked her hair behind her ears three times since entering
the room—a nervous “tell,” as Trish called it. Brilliant scientist. Lousy poker player.
“To me,” Katherine said, “this story sounds like fiction . . . an old legend. And yet . . .” She paused, tucking a
wisp of hair behind her ears once again.
“And yet?”
Katherine sighed. “And yet I was told today by a trusted source that the legend is true.”
“Okay . . .” Where is she going with this?
“I’m going to talk to my brother about it, but it occurs to me that maybe you can help me shed some light on
it before I do. I’d love to know if this legend has ever been corroborated anywhere else in history.”
“In all of history?”
Katherine nodded. “Anywhere in the world, in any language, at any point in history.”
Strange request, Trish thought, but certainly feasible. Ten years ago, the task would have been impossible.
Today, however, with the Internet, the World Wide Web, and the ongoing digitization of the great libraries
and museums in the world, Katherine’s goal could be achieved by using a relatively simple search engine
equipped with an army of translation modules and some well-chosen keywords.
“No problem,” Trish said. Many of the lab’s research books contained passages in ancient languages, and so
Trish was often asked to write specialized Optical Character Recognition translation modules to generate
English text from obscure languages. She had to be the only metasystems specialist on earth who had built
OCR translation modules in Old Frisian, Maek, and Akkadian.
The modules would help, but the trick to building an effective search spider was all in choosing the right key
words. Unique but not overly restrictive.
Katherine looked to be a step ahead of Trish and was already jotting down possible keywords on a slip of
paper. Katherine had written down several when she paused, thought a moment, and then wrote several more.
“Okay,” she finally said, handing Trish the slip of paper.
Trish perused the list of search strings, and her eyes grew wide. What kind of crazy legend is Katherine
investigating? “You want me to search for all of these key phrases?” One of the words Trish didn’t even
recognize. Is that even English? “Do you really think we’ll find all of these in one place? Verbatim?”
“I’d like to try.”
Trish would have said impossible, but the I-word was banned here. Katherine considered it a dangerous
mind-set in a field that often transformed preconceived falsehoods into confirmed truths. Trish Dunne
seriously doubted this key-phrase search would fall into that category.
“How long for results?” Katherine asked.
“A few minutes to write the spider and launch it. After that, maybe fifteen for the spider to exhaust itself.”
“So fast?” Katherine looked encouraged.
Trish nodded. Traditional search engines often required a full day to crawl across the entire online universe,
find new documents, digest their content, and add it to their searchable database. But this was not the kind of
search spider Trish would write.
“I’ll write a program called a delegator,” Trish explained. “It’s not entirely kosher, but it’s fast. Essentially,
it’s a program that orders other people’s search engines to do our work. Most databases have a search
function built in—libraries, museums, universities, governments. So I write a spider that finds their search
engines, inputs your keywords, and asks them to search. This way, we harness the power of thousands of
engines, working in unison.”
Katherine looked impressed. “Parallel processing.”
A kind of metasystem. “I’ll call you if I get anything.”
“I appreciate it,Trish.” Katherine patted her on the back and headed for the door. “I’ll be in the library.”
Trish settled in to write the program. Coding a search spider was a menial task far below her skill level, but
Trish Dunne didn’t care. She would do anything for Katherine Solomon. Sometimes Trish still couldn’t
believe the good fortune that had brought her here.
You’ve come a long way, baby.
Just over a year ago, Trish had quit her job as a metasystems analyst in one of the high-tech industry’s many
cubicle farms. In her off-hours, she did some freelance programming and started an industry blog—“Future
Applications in Computational Metasystem Analysis”—although she doubted anyone read it. Then one
evening her phone rang.
“Trish Dunne?” a woman’s voice asked politely.
“Yes, who’s calling, please?”
“My name is Katherine Solomon.”
Trish almost fainted on the spot. Katherine Solomon? “I just read your book—Noetic Science: Modern
Gateway to Ancient Wisdom—and I wrote about it on my blog!”
“Yes, I know,” the woman replied graciously. “That’s why I’m calling.”
Of course it is, Trish realized, feeling dumb. Even brilliant scientists Google themselves.
“Your blog intrigues me,” Katherine told her. “I wasn’t aware metasystems modeling had come so far.”
“Yes, ma’am,” Trish managed, starstruck. “Data models are an exploding technology with far-reaching
applications.”
For several minutes, the two women chatted about Trish’s work in metasystems, discussing her experience
analyzing, modeling, and predicting the flow of massive data fields.
“Obviously, your book is way over my head,” Trish said, “but I understood enough to see an intersection
with my metasystems work.”
“Your blog said you believe metasystems modeling can transform the study of Noetics?”
“Absolutely. I believe metasystems could turn Noetics into real science.”
“Real science?” Katherine’s tone hardened slightly. “As opposed to . . . ?”
Oh shit, that came out wrong. “Um, what I meant is that Noetics is more . . . esoteric.”
Katherine laughed. “Relax, I’m kidding. I get that all the time.”
I’m not surprised, Trish thought. Even the Institute of Noetic Sciences in California described the field in
arcane and abstruse language, defining it as the study of mankind’s “direct and immediate access to
knowledge beyond what is available to our normal senses and the power of reason.”
The word noetic, Trish had learned, derived from the ancient Greek nous—translating roughly to “inner
knowledge” or “intuitive consciousness.”
“I’m interested in your metasystems work,” Katherine said, “and how it might relate to a project I’m working
on. Any chance you’d be willing to meet? I’d love to pick your brain.”
Katherine Solomon wants to pick my brain? It felt like Maria Sharapova had called for tennis tips.
The next day a white Volvo pulled into Trish’s driveway and an attractive, willowy woman in blue jeans got
out. Trish immediately felt two feet tall. Great, she groaned. Smart, rich, and thin—and I’m supposed to
believe God is good? But Katherine’s unassuming air set Trish instantly at ease.
The two of them settled in on Trish’s huge back porch overlooking an impressive piece of property.
“Your house is amazing,” Katherine said.
“Thanks. I got lucky in college and licensed some software I’d written.”
“Metasystems stuff?”
“A precursor to metasystems. Following 9/11, the government was intercepting and crunching enormous data
fields—civilian e-mail, cell phone, fax, text, Web sites—sniffing for keywords associated with terrorist
communications. So I wrote a piece of software that let them process their data field in a second way . . .
pulling from it an additional intelligence product.” She smiled. “Essentially, my software let them take
America’s temperature.”
“I’m sorry?”
Trish laughed. “Yeah, sounds crazy, I know. What I mean is that it quantified the nation’s emotional state. It
offered a kind of cosmic consciousness barometer, if you will.” Trish explained how, using a data field of the
nation’s communications, one could assess the nation’s mood based on the “occurrence density” of certain
keywords and emotional indicators in the data field. Happier times had happier language, and stressful times
vice versa. In the event, for example, of a terrorist attack, the government could use data fields to measure
the shift in America’s psyche and better advise the president on the emotional impact of the event.
“Fascinating,” Katherine said, stroking her chin. “So essentially you’re examining a population of
individuals . . . as if it were a single organism.”
“Exactly. A metasystem. A single entity defined by the sum of its parts. The human body, for example,
consists of millions of individual cells, each with different attributes and different purposes, but it functions
as a single entity.”
Katherine nodded enthusiastically. “Like a flock of birds or a school of fish moving as one. We call it
convergence or entanglement.”
Trish sensed her famous guest was starting to see the potential of metasystem programming in her own field
of Noetics. “My software,” Trish explained, “was designed to help government agencies better evaluate and
respond appropriately to wide-scale crises—pandemic diseases, national tragedies, terrorism, that sort of
thing.” She paused. “Of course, there’s always the potential that it could be used in other directions . . .
perhaps to take a snapshot of the national mind-set and predict the outcome of a national election or the
direction the stock market will move at the opening bell.”
“Sounds powerful.”
Trish motioned to her big house. “The government thought so.”
Katherine’s gray eyes focused in on her now. “Trish, might I ask about the ethical dilemma posed by your
work?”
“What do you mean?”
“I mean you created a piece of software that can easily be abused. Those who possess it have access to
powerful information not available to everyone. You didn’t feel any hesitation creating it?”
Trish didn’t blink. “Absolutely not. My software is no different than say . . . a flight simulator program.
Some users will practice flying first-aid missions into underdeveloped countries. Some users will practice
flying passenger jets into skyscrapers. Knowledge is a tool, and like all tools, its impact is in the hands of the
user.”
Katherine sat back, looking impressed. “So let me ask you a hypothetical question.”
Trish suddenly sensed their conversation had just turned into a job interview.
Katherine reached down and picked up a tiny speck of sand off the deck, holding it up for Trish to see. “It
occurs to me,” she said, “that your metasystems work essentially lets you calculate the weight of an entire
sandy beach . . . by weighing one grain at a time.”
“Yes, basically that’s right.”
“As you know, this little grain of sand has mass. A very small mass, but mass nonetheless.”
Trish nodded.
“And because this grain of sand has mass, it therefore exerts gravity. Again, too small to feel, but there.”
“Right.”
“Now,” Katherine said, “if we take trillions of these sand grains and let them attract one another to form . . .
say, the moon, then their combined gravity is enough to move entire oceans and drag the tides back and forth
across our planet.”
Trish had no idea where this was headed, but she liked what she was hearing.
“So let’s take a hypothetical,” Katherine said, discarding the sand grain. “What if I told you that a thought . .
. any tiny idea that forms in your mind . . . actually has mass? What if I told you that a thought is an actual
thing, a measurable entity, with a measurable mass? A minuscule mass, of course, but mass nonetheless.
What are the implications?”
“Hypothetically speaking? Well, the obvious implications are . . . if a thought has mass, then a thought exerts
gravity and can pull things toward it.”
Katherine smiled. “You’re good. Now take it a step further. What happens if many people start focusing on
the same thought? All the occurrences of that same thought begin to merge into one, and the cumulative mass
of this thought begins to grow. And therefore, its gravity grows.”
“Okay.”
“Meaning . . . if enough people begin thinking the same thing, then the gravitational force of that thought
becomes tangible . . . and it exerts actual force.” Katherine winked. “And it can have a measurable effect in
our physical world.”
CHAPTER 19
Director Inoue Sato stood with her arms folded, her eyes locked skeptically on Langdon as she processed
what he had just told her. “He said he wants you to unlock an ancient portal? What am I supposed to do with
that, Professor?”
Langdon shrugged weakly. He was feeling ill again and tried not to look down at his friend’s severed hand.
“That’s exactly what he told me. An ancient portal . . . hidden somewhere in this building. I told him I knew
of no portal.”
“Then why does he think you can find it?”
“Obviously, he’s insane.” He said Peter would point the way. Langdon looked down at Peter’s upstretched
finger, again feeling repulsed by his captor’s sadistic play on words. Peter will point the way. Langdon had
already permitted his eyes to follow the pointing finger up to the dome overhead. A portal? Up there?
Insane.
“This man who called me,” Langdon told Sato, “was the only one who knew I was coming to the Capitol
tonight, so whoever informed you I was here tonight, that’s your man. I recommend—”
“Where I got my information is not your concern,” Sato interrupted, voice sharpening. “My top priority at the
moment is to cooperate with this man, and I have information suggesting you are the only one who can give
him what he wants.”
“And my top priority is to find my friend,” Langdon replied, frustrated.
Sato inhaled deeply, her patience clearly being tested. “If we want to find Mr. Solomon, we have one course
of action, Professor—to start cooperating with the one person who seems to know where he is.” Sato checked
her watch. “Our time is limited. I can assure you it is imperative we comply with this man’s demands
quickly.”
“How?” Langdon asked, incredulous. “By locating and unlocking an ancient portal? There is no portal,
Director Sato. This guy’s a lunatic.”
Sato stepped close, less than a foot from Langdon. “If I may point this out . . . your lunatic deftly
manipulated two fairly smart individuals already this morning.” She stared directly at Langdon and then
glanced at Anderson. “In my business, one learns there is a fine line between insanity and genius. We would
be wise to give this man a little respect.”
“He cut off a man’s hand!”
“My point exactly. That is hardly the act of an uncommitted or uncertain individual. More important,
Professor, this man obviously believes you can help him. He brought you all the way to Washington—and he
must have done it for a reason.”
“He said the only reason he thinks I can unlock this ‘portal’ is that Peter told him I can unlock it,” Langdon
countered.
“And why would Peter Solomon say that if it weren’t true?”
“I’m sure Peter said no such thing. And if he did, then he did so under duress. He was confused . . . or
frightened.”
“Yes. It’s called interrogational torture, and it’s quite effective. All the more reason Mr. Solomon would tell
the truth.” Sato spoke as if she’d had personal experience with this technique. “Did he explain why Peter
thinks you alone can unlock the portal?”
Langdon shook his head.
“Professor, if your reputations are correct, then you and Peter Solomon both share an interest in this sort of
thing—secrets, historical esoterica, mysticism, and so on. In all of your discussions with Peter, he never once
mentioned to you anything about a secret portal in Washington, D.C.?”
Langdon could scarcely believe he was being asked this question by a high-ranking officer of the CIA. “I’m
certain of it. Peter and I talk about some pretty arcane things, but believe me, I’d tell him to get his head
examined if he ever told me there was an ancient portal hidden anywhere at all. Particularly one that leads to
the Ancient Mysteries.”
She glanced up. “I’m sorry? The man told you specifically what this portal leads to?”
“Yes, but he didn’t have to.” Langdon motioned to the hand. “The Hand of the Mysteries is a formal
invitation to pass through a mystical gateway and acquire ancient secret knowledge—powerful wisdom
known as the Ancient Mysteries . . . or the lost wisdom of all the ages.”
“So you’ve heard of the secret he believes is hidden here.”
“A lot of historians have heard of it.”
“Then how can you say the portal does not exist?”
“With respect, ma’am, we’ve all heard of the Fountain of Youth and Shangri-la, but that does not mean they
exist.”
The loud squawk of Anderson’s radio interrupted them.
“Chief?” the voice on the radio said.
Anderson snatched his radio from his belt. “Anderson here.”
“Sir, we’ve completed a search of the grounds. There’s no one here that fits the description. Any further
orders, sir?”
Anderson shot a quick glance at Sato, clearly expecting a reprimand, but Director Sato seemed uninterested.
Anderson moved away from Langdon and Sato, speaking quietly into his radio.
Sato’s unwavering focus remained on Langdon. “You’re saying the secret he believes is hidden in
Washington . . . is a fantasy?”
Langdon nodded. “A very old myth. The secret of the Ancient Mysteries is pre-Christian, actually.
Thousands of years old.”
“And yet it’s still around?”
“As are many equally improbable beliefs.” Langdon often reminded his students that most modern religions
included stories that did not hold up to scientific scrutiny: everything from Moses parting the Red Sea . . . to
Joseph Smith using magic eyeglasses to translate the Book of Mormon from a series of gold plates he found
buried in upstate New York. Wide acceptance of an idea is not proof of its validity.
“I see. So what exactly are these . . . Ancient Mysteries?”
Langdon exhaled. Have you got a few weeks? “In short, the Ancient Mysteries refer to a body of secret
knowledge that was amassed long ago. One intriguing aspect of this knowledge is that it allegedly enables its
practitioners to access powerful abilities that lie dormant in the human mind. The enlightened Adepts who
possessed this knowledge vowed to keep it veiled from the masses because it was considered far too potent
and dangerous for the uninitiated.”
“Dangerous in what way?”
“The information was kept hidden for the same reason we keep matches from children. In the correct hands,
fire can provide illumination . . . but in the wrong hands, fire can be highly destructive.”
Sato took off her glasses and studied him. “Tell me, Professor, do you believe such powerful information
could truly exist?”
Langdon was not sure how to respond. The Ancient Mysteries had always been the greatest paradox of his
academic career. Virtually every mystical tradition on earth revolved around the idea that there existed
arcane knowledge capable of imbuing humans with mystical, almost godlike, powers: tarot and I Ching gave
men the ability to see the future; alchemy gave men immortality through the fabled Philosopher’s Stone;
Wicca permitted advanced practitioners to cast powerful spells. The list went on and on.
As an academic, Langdon could not deny the historical record of these traditions—troves of documents,
artifacts, and artwork that, indeed, clearly suggested the ancients had a powerful wisdom that they shared
only through allegory, myths, and symbols, ensuring that only those properly initiated could access its power.
Nonetheless, as a realist and a skeptic, Langdon remained unconvinced.
“Let’s just say I’m a skeptic,” he told Sato. “I have never seen anything in the real world to suggest the
Ancient Mysteries are anything other than legend—a recurring mythological archetype. It seems to me that if
it were possible for humans to acquire miraculous powers, there would be evidence. And yet, so far, history
has given us no men with superhuman powers.”
Sato arched her eyebrows. “That’s not entirely true.”
Langdon hesitated, realizing that for many religious people, there was indeed a precedent for human gods,
Jesus being the most obvious. “Admittedly,” he said, “there are plenty of educated people who believe this
empowering wisdom truly exists, but I’m not yet convinced.”
“Is Peter Solomon one of those people?” Sato asked, glancing toward the hand on the floor.
Langdon could not bring himself to look at the hand. “Peter comes from a family lineage that has always had
a passion for all things ancient and mystical.”
“Was that a yes?” Sato asked.
“I can assure you that even if Peter believes the Ancient Mysteries are real, he does not believe they are
accessible through some kind of portal hidden in Washington, D.C. He understands metaphorical symbolism,
which is something his captor apparently does not.”
Sato nodded. “So you believe this portal is a metaphor.”
“Of course,” Langdon said. “In theory, anyway. It’s a very common metaphor—a mystical portal through
which one must travel to become enlightened. Portals and doorways are common symbolic constructs that
represent transformative rites of passage. To look for a literal portal would be like trying to locate the actual
Gates of Heaven.”
Sato seemed to consider this momentarily. “But it sounds like Mr. Solomon’s captor believes you can unlock
an actual portal.”
Langdon exhaled. “He’s made the same error many zealots make—confusing metaphor with a literal reality.”
Similarly, early alchemists had toiled in vain to transform lead into gold, never realizing that lead-to-gold
was nothing but a metaphor for tapping into true human potential—that of taking a dull, ignorant mind and
transforming it into a bright, enlightened one.
Sato motioned to the hand. “If this man wants you to locate some kind of portal for him, why wouldn’t he
simply tell you how to find it? Why all the dramatics? Why give you a tattooed hand?”
Langdon had asked himself the same question and the answer was unsettling. “Well, it seems the man we are
dealing with, in addition to being mentally unstable, is also highly educated. This hand is proof that he is well
versed in the Mysteries as well as their codes of secrecy. Not to mention with the history of this room.”
“I don’t understand.”
“Everything he has done tonight was done in perfect accordance with ancient protocols. Traditionally, the
Hand of the Mysteries is a sacred invitation, and therefore it must be presented in a sacred place.”
Sato’s eyes narrowed. “This is the Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol Building, Professor, not some sacred shrine to
ancient mystical secrets.”
“Actually, ma’am,” Langdon said, “I know a great number of historians who would disagree with you.”
At that moment, across town, Trish Dunne was seated in the glow of the plasma wall inside the Cube. She
finished preparing her search spider and typed in the five key phrases Katherine had given her.
Here goes nothing.
Feeling little optimism, she launched the spider, effectively commencing a worldwide game of Go Fish. At
blinding speed, the phrases were now being compared to texts all over the world . . . looking for a perfect
match.
Trish couldn’t help but wonder what this was all about, but she had come to accept that working with the
Solomons meant never quite knowing the entire story.
CHAPTER 20
Robert Langdon stole an anxious glance at his wristwatch: 7:58 P.M. The smiling face of Mickey Mouse
did little to cheer him up. I’ve got to find Peter. We’re wasting time.
Sato had stepped aside for a moment to take a phone call, but now she returned to Langdon. “Professor, am I
keeping you from something?”
“No, ma’am,” Langdon said, pulling his sleeve down over his watch. “I’m just extremely concerned about
Peter.”
“I can understand, but I assure you the best thing you can do to help Peter is to help me understand the mindset
of his captor.”
Langdon was not so sure, but he sensed he was not going anywhere until the OS director got the information
she desired.
“A moment ago,” Sato said, “you suggested this Rotunda is somehow sacred to the idea of these Ancient
Mysteries?”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“Explain that to me.”
Langdon knew he would have to choose his words sparingly. He had taught for entire semesters on the
mystical symbolism of Washington, D.C., and there was an almost inexhaustible list of mystical references in
this building alone.
America has a hidden past.
Every time Langdon lectured on the symbology of America, his students were confounded to learn that the
true intentions of our nation’s forefathers had absolutely nothing to do with what so many politicians now
claimed.
America’s intended destiny has been lost to history.
The forefathers who founded this capital city first named her “Rome.” They had named her river the Tiber
and erected a classical capital of pantheons and temples, all adorned with images of history’s great gods and
goddesses—Apollo, Minerva, Venus, Helios, Vulcan, Jupiter. In her center, as in many of the great classical
cities, the founders had erected an enduring tribute to the ancients—the Egyptian obelisk. This obelisk, larger
even than Cairo’s or Alexandria’s, rose 555 feet into the sky, more than thirty stories, proclaiming thanks and
honor to the demigod forefather for whom this capital city took its newer name.
Washington.
Now, centuries later, despite America’s separation of church and state, this state-sponsored Rotunda
glistened with ancient religious symbolism. There were over a dozen different gods in the Rotunda—more
than the original Pantheon in Rome. Of course, the Roman Pantheon had been converted to Christianity in
609 . . . but this pantheon was never converted; vestiges of its true history still remained in plain view.
“As you may know,” Langdon said, “this Rotunda was designed as a tribute to one of Rome’s most venerated
mystical shrines. The Temple of Vesta.”
“As in the vestal virgins?” Sato looked doubtful that Rome’s virginal guardians of the flame had anything to
do with the U.S. Capitol Building.
“The Temple of Vesta in Rome,” Langdon said, “was circular, with a gaping hole in the floor, through which
the sacred fire of enlightenment could be tended by a sisterhood of virgins whose job it was to ensure the
flame never went out.”
Sato shrugged. “This Rotunda is a circle, but I see no gaping hole in this floor.”
“No, not anymore, but for years the center of this room had a large opening precisely where Peter’s hand is
now.” Langdon motioned to the floor. “In fact, you can still see the marks in the floor from the railing that
kept people from falling in.”
“What?” Sato demanded, scrutinizing the floor. “I’ve never heard that.”
“Looks like he’s right.” Anderson pointed out the circle of iron nubs where the posts had once been. “I’ve
seen these before, but I never had any idea why they were there.”
You’re not alone, Langdon thought, imagining the thousands of people every day, including famous
lawmakers, who strode across the center of the Rotunda having no idea there was once a day when they
would have plunged down into the Capitol Crypt—the level beneath the Rotunda floor.
“The hole in the floor,” Langdon told them, “was eventually covered, but for a good while, those who visited
the Rotunda could see straight down to the fire that burned below.”
Sato turned. “Fire? In the U.S. Capitol?”
“More of a large torch, actually—an eternal flame that burned in the crypt directly beneath us. It was
supposed to be visible through the hole in the floor, making this room a modern Temple of Vesta. This
building even had its own vestal virgin—a federal employee called the Keeper of the Crypt—who
successfully kept the flame burning for fifty years, until politics, religion, and smoke damage snuffed out the
idea.”
Both Anderson and Sato looked surprised.
Nowadays, the only reminder that a flame once burned here was the four-pointed star compass embedded in
the crypt floor one story below them—a symbol of America’s eternal flame, which once shed illumination
toward the four corners of the New World.
“So, Professor,” Sato said, “your contention is that the man who left Peter’s hand here knew all this?”
“Clearly. And much, much more. There are symbols all over this room that reflect a belief in the Ancient
Mysteries.”
“Secret wisdom,” Sato said with more than a hint of sarcasm in her voice. “Knowledge that lets men acquire
godlike powers?”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“That hardly fits with the Christian underpinnings of this country.”
“So it would seem, but it’s true. This transformation of man into God is called apotheosis. Whether or not
you’re aware of it, this theme—transforming man into god—is the core element in this Rotunda’s
symbolism.”
“Apotheosis?” Anderson spun with a startled look of recognition.
“Yes.” Anderson works here. He knows. “The word apotheosis literally means ‘divine transformation’—that
of man becoming God. It’s from the ancient Greek: apo—‘to become,’ theos—‘god.’ ”
Anderson looked amazed. “Apotheosis means ‘to become God’? I had no idea.”
“What am I missing?” Sato demanded.
“Ma’am,” Langdon said, “the largest painting in this building is called The Apotheosis of Washington. And it
clearly depicts George Washington being transformed into a god.”
Sato looked doubtful. “I’ve never seen anything of the sort.”
“Actually, I’m sure you have.” Langdon raised his index finger, pointing straight up. “It’s directly over your
head.”
CHAPTER 21
The Apotheosis of Washington—a 4,664-square-foot fresco that covers the canopy of the Capitol Rotunda—
was completed in 1865 by Constantino Brumidi.
Known as “The Michelangelo of the Capitol,” Brumidi had laid claim to the Capitol Rotunda in the same
way Michelangelo had laid claim to the Sistine Chapel, by painting a fresco on the room’s most lofty
canvas—the ceiling. Like Michelangelo, Brumidi had done some of his finest work inside the Vatican.
Brumidi, however, immigrated to America in 1852, abandoning God’s largest shrine in favor of a new shrine,
the U.S. Capitol, which now glistened with examples of his mastery—from the trompe l’oeil of the Brumidi
Corridors to the frieze ceiling of the Vice President’s Room. And yet it was the enormous image hovering
above the Capitol Rotunda that most historians considered to be Brumidi’s masterwork.
Robert Langdon gazed up at the massive fresco that covered the ceiling. He usually enjoyed his students’
startled reactions to this fresco’s bizarre imagery, but at the moment he simply felt trapped in a nightmare he
had yet to understand.
Director Sato was standing next to him with her hands on her hips, frowning up at the distant ceiling.
Langdon sensed she was having the same reaction many had when they first stopped to examine the painting
at the core of their nation.
Utter confusion.
You’re not alone, Langdon thought. For most people, The Apotheosis of Washington got stranger and
stranger the longer they looked at it. “That’s George Washington on the central panel,” Langdon said,
pointing 180 feet upward into the middle of the dome. “As you can see, he’s dressed in white robes, attended
by thirteen maidens, and ascending on a cloud above mortal man. This is the moment of his apotheosis . . .
his transformation into a god.”
Sato and Anderson said nothing.
“Nearby,” Langdon continued, “you can see a strange, anachronistic series of figures: ancient gods
presenting our forefathers with advanced knowledge. There’s Minerva giving technological inspiration to our
nation’s great inventors—Ben Franklin, Robert Fulton, Samuel Morse.” Langdon pointed them out one by
one. “And over there is Vulcan helping us build a steam engine. Beside them is Neptune demonstrating how
to lay the transatlantic cable. Beside that is Ceres, goddess of grain and root of our word cereal; she’s sitting
on the McCormick reaper, the farming breakthrough that enabled this country to become a world leader in
food production. The painting quite overtly portrays our forefathers receiving great wisdom from the gods.”
He lowered his head, looking at Sato now. “Knowledge is power, and the right knowledge lets man perform
miraculous, almost godlike tasks.”
Sato dropped her gaze back down to Langdon and rubbed her neck. “Laying a phone cable is a far cry from
being a god.”
“Perhaps to a modern man,” Langdon replied. “But if George Washington knew that we had become a race
that possessed the power to speak to one another across oceans, fly at the speed of sound, and set foot on our
moon, he would assume that we had become gods, capable of miraculous tasks.” He paused. “In the words of
futurist Arthur C. Clarke, ‘Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.’ ”
Sato pursed her lips, apparently deep in thought. She glanced down at the hand, and then followed the
direction of the outstretched index finger up into the dome. “Professor, you were told, ‘Peter will point the
way.’ Is that correct?”
“Yes, ma’am, but—”
“Chief,” Sato said, turning away from Langdon, “can you get us a closer look at the painting?”
Anderson nodded. “There’s a catwalk around the interior of the dome.” Langdon looked way, way up to the
tiny railing visible just beneath the painting and felt his body go rigid. “There’s no need to go up there.” He
had experienced that seldom-visited catwalk once before, as the guest of a U.S. senator and his wife, and he
had almost fainted from the dizzying height and perilous walkway.
“No need?” Sato demanded. “Professor, we have a man who believes this room contains a portal that has the
potential to make him a god; we have a ceiling fresco that symbolizes the transformation of a man into a god;
and we have a hand pointing straight at that painting. It seems everything is urging us upward.”
“Actually,” Anderson interjected, glancing up, “not many people know this, but there is one hexagonal coffer
in the dome that actually swings open like a portal, and you can peer down through it and—”
“Wait a second,” Langdon said, “you’re missing the point. The portal this man is looking for is a figurative
portal—a gateway that doesn’t exist. When he said, ‘Peter will point the way,’ he was talking in metaphorical
terms. This pointing-hand gesture—with its index finger and thumb extended upward—is a well-known
symbol of the Ancient Mysteries, and it appears all over the world in ancient art. This same gesture appears
in three of Leonardo da Vinci’s most famous encoded masterpieces—The Last Supper, Adoration of the
Magi, and Saint John the Baptist. It’s a symbol of man’s mystical connection to God.” As above, so below.
The madman’s bizarre choice of words was starting to feel more relevant now.
“I’ve never seen it before,” Sato said.
Then watch ESPN, Langdon thought, always amused to see professional athletes point skyward in gratitude
to God after a touchdown or home run. He wondered how many knew they were continuing a pre-Christian
mystical tradition of acknowledging the mystical power above, which, for one brief moment, had
transformed them into a god capable of miraculous feats.
“If it’s of any help,” Langdon said, “Peter’s hand is not the first such hand to make an appearance in this
Rotunda.”
Sato eyed him like he was insane. “I beg your pardon?”
Langdon motioned to her BlackBerry. “Google ‘George Washington Zeus.’ ”
Sato looked uncertain but started typing. Anderson inched toward her, looking over her shoulder intently.
Langdon said, “This Rotunda was once dominated by a massive sculpture of a bare-chested George
Washington . . . depicted as a god. He sat in the same exact pose as Zeus in the Pantheon, bare chest exposed,
left hand holding a sword, right hand raised with thumb and finger extended.”
Sato had apparently found an online image, because Anderson was staring at her BlackBerry in shock. “Hold
on, that’s George Washington?”
“Yes,” Langdon said. “Depicted as Zeus.”
“Look at his hand,” Anderson said, still peering over Sato’s shoulder. “His right hand is in the same exact
position as Mr. Solomon’s.”
As I said, Langdon thought, Peter’s hand is not the first to make an appearance in this room. When Horatio
Greenough’s statue of a naked George Washington was first unveiled in the Rotunda, many joked that
Washington must be reaching skyward in a desperate attempt to find some clothes. As American religious
ideals changed, however, the joking criticism turned to controversy, and the statue was removed, banished to
a shed in the east garden. Currently, it made its home at the Smithsonian’s National Museum of American
History, where those who saw it had no reason to suspect that it was one of the last vestigial links to a time
when the father of the country had watched over the U.S. Capitol as a god . . . like Zeus watching over the
Pantheon.
Sato began dialing a number on her BlackBerry, apparently seeing this as an opportune moment to check in
with her staff. “What have you got?” She listened patiently. “I see . . .” She glanced directly at Langdon, then
at Peter’s hand. “You’re certain?” She listened a moment longer. “Okay, thanks.” She hung up and turned
back toward Langdon. “My support staff did some research and confirms the existence of your so-called
Hand of the Mysteries, corroborating everything you said: five fingertip markings—the star, the sun, the key,
the crown, and the lantern—as well as the fact that this hand served as an ancient invitation to learn secret
wisdom.”
“I’m glad,” Langdon said.
“Don’t be,” she replied curtly. “It appears we’re now at a dead end until you share whatever it is you’re still
not telling me.”
“Ma’am?”
Sato stepped toward him. “We’ve come full circle, Professor. You’ve told me nothing I could not have
learned from my own staff. And so I will ask you once more. Why were you brought here tonight? What
makes you so special? What is it that you alone know?”
“We’ve been through this,” Langdon fired back. “I don’t know why this guy thinks I know anything at all!”
Langdon was half tempted to demand how the hell Sato knew that he was in the Capitol tonight, but they’d
been through that, too. Sato isn’t talking. “If I knew the next step,” he told her, “I’d tell you. But I don’t.
Traditionally, the Hand of the Mysteries is extended by a teacher to a student. And then, shortly afterward,
the hand is followed up with a set of instructions . . . directions to a temple, the name of the master who will
teach you—something! But all this guy left for us is five tattoos! Hardly—” Langdon stopped short.
Sato eyed him. “What is it?”
Langdon’s eyes shot back to the hand. Five tattoos. He now realized that what he was saying might not be
entirely true.
“Professor?” Sato pressed.
Langdon inched toward the gruesome object. Peter will point the way.
“Earlier, it crossed my mind that maybe this guy had left an object clenched in Peter’s palm—a map, or a
letter, or a set of directions.”
“He didn’t,” Anderson said. “As you can see, those three fingers are not clenched tightly.”
“You’re right,” Langdon said. “But it occurs to me . . .” He crouched down now, trying to see up under the
fingers to the hidden part of Peter’s palm. “Maybe it’s not written on paper.”
“Tattooed?” Anderson said.
Langdon nodded.
“Do you see anything on the palm?” Sato asked.
Langdon crouched lower, trying to peer up under the loosely clenched fingers. “The angle is impossible. I
can’t—”
“Oh, for heaven’s sake,” Sato said, moving toward him. “Just open the damned thing!”
Anderson stepped in front of her. “Ma’am! We should really wait for forensics before we touch—”
“I want some answers,” Sato said, pushing past him. She crouched down, edging Langdon away from the
hand.
Langdon stood up and watched in disbelief as Sato pulled a pen from her pocket, sliding it carefully under
the three clenched fingers. Then, one by one, she pried each finger upward until the hand stood fully open,
with its palm visible.
She glanced up at Langdon, and a thin smile spread across her face. “Right again, Professor.”
CHAPTER 22
Pacing the library, Katherine Solomon pulled back the sleeve of her lab coat and checked her watch. She
was not a woman accustomed to waiting, but at the moment, she felt as if her whole world were on hold. She
was waiting for Trish’s search-spider results, she was waiting for word from her brother, and also, she was
waiting for a callback from the man who was responsible for this entire troubling situation.
I wish he hadn’t told me, she thought. Normally, Katherine was extremely careful about making new
acquaintances, and although she had met this man for the first time only this afternoon, he had earned her
trust in a matter of minutes. Completely.
His call had come this afternoon while Katherine was at home enjoying her usual Sunday-afternoon pleasure
of catching up on the week’s scientific journals.
“Ms. Solomon?” an unusually airy voice had said. “My name is Dr. Christopher Abaddon. I was hoping I
might speak to you for a moment about your brother?”
“I’m sorry, who is this?” she had demanded. And how did you get my private cell-phone number?
“Dr. Christopher Abaddon?”
Katherine did not recognize the name.
The man cleared his throat, as if the situation had just become awkward. “I apologize, Ms. Solomon. I was
under the impression your brother had told you about me. I’m his doctor. Your cell number was listed as his
emergency contact.”
Katherine’s heart skipped. Emergency contact? “Is something wrong?”
“No . . . I don’t think so,” the man said. “Your brother missed an appointment this morning, and I can’t reach
him on any of his numbers. He never misses appointments without calling, and I’m just a little worried. I
hesitated to phone you, but—”
“No, no, not at all, I appreciate the concern.” Katherine was still trying to place the doctor’s name. “I haven’t
spoken to my brother since yesterday morning, but he probably just forgot to turn on his cell.” Katherine had
recently given him a new iPhone, and he still hadn’t taken the time to figure out how to use it.
“You say you’re his doctor?” she asked. Does Peter have an illness he’s keeping from me?
There was a weighty pause on the line. “I’m terribly sorry, but I’ve obviously just made a rather serious
professional error by calling you. Your brother told me you were aware of his visits to me, but now I see
that’s not the case.”
My brother lied to his doctor? Katherine’s concern was now growing steadily. “Is he sick?”
“I’m sorry, Ms. Solomon, doctor-patient confidentiality precludes me from discussing your brother’s
condition, and I’ve already said too much by admitting he is my patient. I’m going to hang up now, but if you
hear from him today, please ask him to call me so I know he’s okay.”
“Wait!” Katherine said. “Please tell me what’s wrong with Peter!”
Dr. Abaddon exhaled, sounding displeased with his mistake. “Ms. Solomon, I can hear you’re upset, and I
don’t blame you. I’m sure your brother is fine. He was in my office just yesterday.”
“Yesterday? And he’s scheduled again today? This sounds urgent.”
The man heaved a sigh. “I suggest we give him a little more time before we—”
“I’m coming by your office right now,” Katherine said, heading for the door. “Where are you located?”
Silence.
“Dr. Christopher Abaddon?” Katherine said. “I can look up your address myself, or you can simply give it to
me. Either way, I’m coming over.”
The doctor paused. “If I meet with you, Ms. Solomon, would you please do me the courtesy of saying
nothing to your brother until I’ve had a chance to explain my misstep?”
“That’s fine.”
“Thank you. My office is in Kalorama Heights.” He gave her an address.
Twenty minutes later, Katherine Solomon was navigating the stately streets of Kalorama Heights. She had
phoned all of her brother’s numbers with no reply. She did not feel overly concerned about her brother’s
whereabouts, and yet, the news that he was secretly seeing a doctor . . . was troubling.
When Katherine finally located the address, she stared up at the building in confusion. This is a doctor’s
office?
The opulent mansion before her had a wrought-iron security fence, electronic cameras, and lush grounds. As
she slowed to double-check the address, one of the security cameras rotated toward her, and the gate swung
open. Tentatively, Katherine drove up the driveway and parked next to a six-car garage and a stretch limo.
What kind of doctor is this guy?
As she got out of her car, the front door of the mansion opened, and an elegant figure drifted out onto the
landing. He was handsome, exceptionally tall, and younger than she had imagined. Even so, he projected the
sophistication and polish of an older man. He was impeccably dressed in a dark suit and tie, and his thick
blond hair was immaculately coiffed.
“Ms. Solomon, I’m Dr. Christopher Abaddon,” he said, his voice a breathy whisper. When they shook hands,
his skin felt smooth and well tended.
“Katherine Solomon,” she said, trying not to stare at his skin, which was unusually smooth and bronzed. Is
he wearing makeup?
Katherine felt a growing disquiet as she stepped into the home’s beautifully appointed foyer. Classical music
played softly in the background, and it smelled as if someone had burned incense. “This is lovely,” she said,
“although I expected more of . . . an office.”
“I’m fortunate to work out of my home.” The man led her into a living room, where there was a crackling
fire. “Please make yourself comfortable. I’m just steeping some tea. I’ll bring it out, and we can talk.” He
strode toward the kitchen and disappeared.
Katherine Solomon did not sit. Female intuition was a potent instinct that she had learned to trust, and
something about this place was making her skin crawl. She saw nothing that looked anything like any
doctor’s office she had ever seen. The walls of this antique-adorned living room were covered with classical
art, primarily paintings with strange mythical themes. She paused before a large canvas depicting the Three
Graces, whose nude bodies were spectacularly rendered in vivid colors.
“That’s the original Michael Parkes oil.” Dr. Abaddon appeared without warning beside her, holding a tray
of steaming tea. “I thought we’d sit by the fire?” He led her over to the living room and offered her a seat.
“There’s no reason to be nervous.”
“I’m not nervous,” Katherine said entirely too quickly.
He gave her a reassuring smile. “Actually, it is my business to know when people are nervous.”
“I beg your pardon?”
“I’m a practicing psychiatrist, Ms. Solomon. That is my profession. I’ve been seeing your brother for almost
a year now. I’m his therapist.”
Katherine could only stare. My brother is in therapy?
“Patients often choose to keep their therapy to themselves,” the man said. “I made a mistake by calling you,
although in my defense, your brother did mislead me.”
“I . . . I had no idea.”
“I apologize if I made you nervous,” he said, sounding embarrassed. “I noticed you studying my face when
we met, and yes, I do wear makeup.” He touched his own cheek, looking self-conscious. “I have a
dermatological condition, which I prefer to hide. My wife usually puts the makeup on for me, but when she’s
not here, I have to rely on my own heavy touch.”
Katherine nodded, too embarrassed to speak.
“And this lovely hair . . .” He touched his lush blond mane. “A wig. My skin condition affected my scalp
follicles as well, and all my hair jumped ship.” He shrugged. “I’m afraid my one sin is vanity.”
“Apparently mine is rudeness,” Katherine said.
“Not at all.” Dr. Abaddon’s smile was disarming. “Shall we start over? Perhaps with some tea?”
They sat in front of the fire and Abaddon poured tea. “Your brother got me in the habit of serving tea during
our sessions. He said the Solomons are tea drinkers.”
“Family tradition,” Katherine said. “Black, please.”
They sipped their tea and made small talk for a few minutes, but Katherine was eager for information about
her brother. “Why was my brother coming to you?” she asked. And why didn’t he tell me? Admittedly, Peter
had endured more than his fair share of tragedy in his life—losing his father at a young age, and then, within
a span of five years, burying his only son and then his mother. Even so, Peter had always found a way to
cope.
Dr. Abaddon took a sip of tea. “Your brother came to me because he trusts me. We have a bond beyond that
of normal patient and doctor.” He motioned to a framed document near the fireplace. It looked like a
diploma, until Katherine spied the double-headed phoenix.
“You’re a Mason?” The highest degree, no less.
“Peter and I are brothers of sorts.”
“You must have done something important to be invited into the thirty-third degree.”
“Not really,” he said. “I have family money, and I give a lot of money to Masonic charities.”
Katherine now realized why her brother trusted this young doctor. A Mason with family money, interested in
philanthropy and ancient mythology?
Dr. Abaddon had more in common with her brother than she had initially imagined.
“When I asked why my brother came to you,” she said, “I didn’t mean why did he choose you. I meant, why
is he seeking the services of a psychiatrist?”
Dr. Abaddon smiled. “Yes, I know. I was trying to sidestep the question politely. It’s really not something I
should be discussing.” He paused. “Although I must say I’m puzzled that your brother would keep our
discussions from you, considering that they relate so directly to your research.”
“My research?” Katherine said, taken totally off guard. My brother talks about my research?
“Recently, your brother came to me looking for a professional opinion about the psychological impact of the
breakthroughs you are making in your lab.”
Katherine almost choked on the tea. “Really? I’m . . . surprised,” she managed. What is Peter thinking? He
told his shrink about my work?! Their security protocol involved not discussing with anyone what Katherine
was working on. Moreover, the confidentiality had been her brother’s idea.
“Certainly you are aware, Ms. Solomon, that your brother is deeply concerned about what will happen when
your research goes public. He sees the potential for a significant philosophical shift in the world . . . and he
came here to discuss the possible ramifications . . . from a psychological perspective.”
“I see,” Katherine said, her teacup now shaking slightly.
“The questions we discuss are challenging ones: What happens to the human condition if the great mysteries
of life are finally revealed? What happens when those beliefs that we accept on faith . . . are suddenly
categorically proven as fact? Or disproved as myth? One could argue that there exist certain questions that
are best left unanswered.”
Katherine could not believe what she was hearing, and yet she kept her emotions in check. “I hope you don’t
mind, Dr. Abaddon, but I’d prefer not to discuss the details of my work. I have no immediate plans to make
anything public. For the time being, my discoveries will remain safely locked in my lab.”
“Interesting.” Abaddon leaned back in his chair, lost in thought for a moment. “In any event, I asked your
brother to come back today because yesterday he suffered a bit of a break. When that happens, I like to have
clients—”
“Break?” Katherine’s heart was pounding. “As in breakdown?” She couldn’t imagine her brother breaking
down over anything.
Abaddon reached out kindly. “Please, I can see I’ve upset you. I’m sorry. Considering these awkward
circumstances, I can understand how you might feel entitled to answers.”
“Whether I’m entitled or not,” Katherine said, “my brother is all I have left of my family. Nobody knows him
better than I do, so if you tell me what the hell happened, maybe I can help you. We all want the same
thing—what’s best for Peter.”
Dr. Abaddon fell silent for several long moments and then began slowly nodding as if Katherine might have
a point. Finally, he spoke. “For the record, Ms. Solomon, if I decide to share this information with you, I
would do so only because I think your insights might help me assist your brother.”
“Of course.”
Abaddon leaned forward, putting his elbows on his knees. “Ms. Solomon, as long as I’ve been seeing your
brother, I’ve sensed in him a deep struggle with feelings of guilt. I’ve never pressed him on it because that’s
not why he comes to me. And yet yesterday, for a number of reasons, I finally asked him about it.” Abaddon
locked eyes with her. “Your brother opened up, rather dramatically and unexpectedly. He told me things I
had not expected to hear . . . including everything that happened the night your mother died.”
Christmas Eve—almost exactly ten years ago. She died in my arms.
“He told me your mother was murdered during a robbery attempt at your home? A man broke in looking for
something he believed your brother was hiding?”
“That’s correct.”
Abaddon’s eyes were appraising her. “Your brother said he shot the man dead?”
“Yes.”
Abaddon stroked his chin. “Do you recall what the intruder was looking for when he broke into your home?”
Katherine had tried in vain for ten years to block out the memory. “Yes, his demand was very specific.
Unfortunately, none of us knew what he was talking about. His demand never made sense to any of us.”
“Well, it made sense to your brother.”
“What?” Katherine sat up.
“At least according to the story he told me yesterday, Peter knew exactly what the intruder was looking for.
And yet your brother did not want to hand it over, so he pretended not to understand.”
“That’s absurd. Peter couldn’t possibly have known what the man wanted. His demands made no sense!”
“Interesting.” Dr. Abaddon paused and took a few notes. “As I mentioned, however, Peter told me he did
know. Your brother believes if he had only cooperated with the intruder, maybe your mother would be alive
today. This decision is the source of all his guilt.”
Katherine shook her head. “That’s crazy . . .”
Abaddon slumped, looking troubled. “Ms. Solomon, this has been useful feedback. As I feared, your brother
seems to have had a little break with reality. I must admit, I was afraid this might be the case. That’s why I
asked him to come back today. These delusional episodes are not uncommon when they relate to traumatic
memories.”
Katherine shook her head again. “Peter is far from delusional, Dr. Abaddon.”
“I would agree, except . . .”
“Except what?”
“Except that his recounting of the attack was just the beginning . . . a tiny fraction of the long and far-fetched
tale he told me.”
Katherine leaned forward in her seat. “What did Peter tell you?”
Abaddon gave a sad smile. “Ms. Solomon, let me ask you this. Has your brother ever discussed with you
what he believes is hidden here in Washington, D.C. . . . or the role he believes he plays in protecting a great
treasure . . . of lost ancient wisdom?”
Katherine’s jaw fell open. “What in the world are you talking about?”
Dr. Abaddon heaved a long sigh. “What I am about to tell you will be a bit shocking, Katherine.” He paused
and locked eyes with her. “But it will be immeasurably helpful if you can tell me anything you may know
about it.” He reached for her cup. “More tea?”
CHAPTER 23
Another tattoo.
Langdon crouched anxiously beside Peter’s open palm and examined the seven tiny symbols that had been
hidden beneath the lifeless clenched fingers.
“They appear to be numbers,” Langdon said, surprised. “Although I don’t recognize them.”
“The first is a Roman numeral,” Anderson said.
“Actually, I don’t think so,” Langdon corrected. “The Roman numeral I-I-I-X doesn’t exist. It would be
written V-I-I.”
“How about the rest of it?” Sato asked.
“I’m not sure. It looks like eight-eight-five in Arabic numbers.”
“Arabic?” Anderson asked. “They look like normal numbers.”
“Our normal numbers are Arabic.” Langdon had become so accustomed to clarifying this point for his
students that he’d actually prepared a lecture about the scientific advances made by early Middle Eastern
cultures, one of them being our modern numbering system, whose advantages over Roman numerals
included ‘positional notation’ and the invention of the number zero. Of course, Langdon always ended this
lecture with a reminder that Arab culture had also given mankind the word al-kuhl—the favorite beverage of
Harvard freshmen—known as alcohol.
Langdon scrutinized the tattoo, feeling puzzled. “And I’m not even sure about the eight-eight-five. The
rectilinear writing looks unusual. Those may not be numbers.”
“Then what are they? Sato asked.
“I’m not sure. The whole tattoo looks almost . . . runic.”
“Meaning?” Sato asked.
“Runic alphabets are composed solely of straight lines. Their letters are called runes and were often used for
carving in stone because curves were too difficult to chisel.”
“If these are runes,” Sato said, “what is their meaning?”
Langdon shook his head. His expertise extended only to the most rudimentary runic alphabet—Futhark—a
third-century Teutonic system, and this was not Futhark. “To be honest, I’m not even sure these are runes.
You’d need to ask a specialist. There are dozens of different forms—Hälsinge, Manx, the ‘dotted’
Stungnar—”
“Peter Solomon is a Mason, is he not?”
Langdon did a double take. “Yes, but what does that have to do with this?” He stood up now, towering over
the tiny woman.
“You tell me. You just said that runic alphabets are used for stone carvings, and it is my understanding that
the original Freemasons were stone craftsmen. I mention this only because when I asked my office to search
for a connection between the Hand of the Mysteries and Peter Solomon, their search returned one link in
particular.” She paused, as if to emphasize the importance of her finding. “The Masons.”
Langdon exhaled, fighting the impulse to tell Sato the same thing he constantly told his students: “Google”
is not a synonym for “research.” In these days of massive, worldwide keyword searches, it seemed
everything was linked to everything. The world was becoming one big entangled web of information that
was getting denser every day.
Langdon maintained a patient tone. “I’m not surprised the Masons appeared in your staff’s search. Masons
are a very obvious link between Peter Solomon and any number of esoteric topics.”
“Yes,” Sato said, “which is another reason I have been surprised this evening that you have not yet
mentioned the Masons. After all, you’ve been talking about secret wisdom protected by an enlightened few.
That sounds very Masonic, does it not?”
“It does . . . and it also sounds very Rosicrucian, Kabbalistic, Alumbradian, and any number of other esoteric
groups.”
“But Peter Solomon is a Mason—a very powerful Mason, at that. It seems the Masons would come to mind
if we were talking about secrets. Heaven knows the Masons love their secrets.”
Langdon could hear the distrust in her voice, and he wanted no part of it. “If you want to know anything
about the Masons, you would be far better served to ask a Mason.”
“Actually,” Sato said, “I’d prefer to ask someone I can trust.”
Langdon found the comment both ignorant and offensive. “For the
record, ma’am, the entire Masonic philosophy is built on honesty and integrity. Masons are among the most
trustworthy men you could ever hope to meet.”
“I have seen persuasive evidence to the contrary.”
Langdon was liking Director Sato less and less with each passing moment. He had spent years writing about
the Masons’ rich tradition of metaphorical iconography and symbols, and knew that Masons had always been
one of the most unfairly maligned and misunderstood organizations in the world. Regularly accused of
everything from devil worship to plotting a one-world government, the Masons also had a policy of never
responding to their critics, which made them an easy target.
“Regardless,” Sato said, her tone biting, “we are again at an impasse, Mr. Langdon. It seems to me there is
either something you are missing . . . or something you are not telling me. The man we’re dealing with said
that Peter Solomon chose you specifically.” She leveled a cold stare at Langdon. “I think it’s time we move
this conversation to CIA headquarters. Maybe we’ll have more luck there.”
Sato’s threat barely registered with Langdon. She had just said something that had lodged in his mind. Peter
Solomon chose you. The comment, combined with the mention of Masons, had hit Langdon strangely. He
looked down at the Masonic ring on Peter’s finger. The ring was one of Peter’s most prized possessions—a
Solomon family heirloom that bore the symbol of the double-headed phoenix—the ultimate mystical icon of
Masonic wisdom. The gold glinted in the light, sparking an unexpected memory.
Langdon gasped, recalling the eerie whisper of Peter’s captor: It really hasn’t dawned on you yet, has it?
Why you were chosen?
Now, in one terrifying moment, Langdon’s thoughts snapped into focus and the fog lifted.
All at once, Langdon’s purpose here was crystal clear.
Ten miles away, driving south on Suitland Parkway, Mal’akh heard a distinctive vibration on the seat beside
him. It was Peter Solomon’s iPhone, which had proven a powerful tool today. The visual caller ID now
displayed the image of an attractive middle-aged woman with long black hair.
INCOMING CALL—KATHERINE SOLOMON
Mal’akh smiled, ignoring the call. Destiny pulls me closer.
He had lured Katherine Solomon to his home this afternoon for one reason only—to determine if she had
information that could assist him . . . perhaps a family secret that might help Mal’akh locate what he sought.
Clearly, however, Katherine’s brother had told her nothing of what he had been guarding all these years.
Even so, Mal’akh had learned something else from Katherine. Something that has earned her a few extra
hours of life today. Katherine had confirmed for him that all of her research was in one location, safely
locked inside her lab.
I must destroy it.
Katherine’s research was poised to open a new door of understanding, and once the door was opened even a
crack, others would follow. It would just be a matter of time before everything changed. I cannot let that
happen. The world must stay as it is . . . adrift in ignorant darkness.
The iPhone beeped, indicating Katherine had left a voice mail. Mal’akh retrieved it.
“Peter, it’s me again.” Katherine’s voice sounded concerned. “Where are you? I’m still thinking about my
conversation with Dr. Abaddon . . . and I’m worried. Is everything okay? Please call me. I’m at the lab.”
The voice mail ended.
Mal’akh smiled. Katherine should worry less about her brother, and more about herself. He turned off
Suitland Parkway onto Silver Hill Road. Less than a mile later, in the darkness, he spotted the faint outline of
the SMSC nestled in the trees off the highway to his right. The entire complex was surrounded by a high
razor-wire fence.
A secure building? Mal’akh chuckled to himself. I know someone who will open the door for me.
CHAPTER 24
The revelation crashed over Langdon like a wave.
I know why I am here.
Standing in the center of the Rotunda, Langdon felt a powerful urge to turn and run away . . . from Peter’s
hand, from the shining gold ring, from the suspicious eyes of Sato and Anderson. Instead, he stood dead still,
clinging more tightly to the leather daybag that hung on his shoulder. I’ve got to get out of here.
His jaw clenched as his memory began replaying the scene from that cold morning, years ago in Cambridge.
It was six A.M. and Langdon was entering his classroom as he always did following his ritual morning laps
in the Harvard Pool. The familiar smells of chalk dust and steam heat greeted him as he crossed the
threshold. He took two steps toward his desk but stopped short.
A figure was waiting there for him—an elegant gentleman with an aquiline face and regal gray eyes.
“Peter?” Langdon stared in shock.
Peter Solomon’s smile flashed white in the dimly lit room. “Good morning, Robert. Surprised to see me?”
His voice was soft, and yet there was power there.
Langdon hurried over and warmly shook his friend’s hand. “What in the world is a Yale blue blood doing on
the Crimson campus before dawn?”
“Covert mission behind enemy lines,” Solomon said, laughing. He motioned to Langdon’s trim waistline.
“Laps are paying off. You’re in good shape.”
“Just trying to make you feel old,” Langdon said, toying with him. “It’s great to see you, Peter. What’s up?”
“Short business trip,” the man replied, glancing around the deserted classroom. “I’m sorry to drop in on you
like this, Robert, but I have only a few minutes. There’s something I needed to ask you . . . in person. A
favor.”
That’s a first. Langdon wondered what a simple college professor could possibly do for the man who had
everything. “Anything at all,” he replied, pleased for any opportunity to do something for someone who had
given him so much, especially when Peter’s life of good fortune had also been marred by so much tragedy.
Solomon lowered his voice. “I was hoping you would consider looking after something for me.”
Langdon rolled his eyes. “Not Hercules, I hope.” Langdon had once agreed to take care of Solomon’s
hundred-fifty-pound mastiff, Hercules, during Solomon’s travels. While at Langdon’s home, the dog
apparently had become homesick for his favorite leather chew toy and had located a worthy substitute in
Langdon’s study—an original vellum, hand-calligraphed, illuminated Bible from the 1600s. Somehow “bad
dog” didn’t quite seem adequate.
“You know, I’m still searching for a replacement,” Solomon said, smiling sheepishly.
“Forget it. I’m glad Hercules got a taste of religion.”
Solomon chuckled but seemed distracted. “Robert, the reason I came to see you is I’d like you to keep an eye
on something that is quite valuable to me. I inherited it a while back, but I’m no longer comfortable leaving it
in my home or in my office.”
Langdon immediately felt uncomfortable. Anything “quite valuable” in Peter Solomon’s world had to be
worth an absolute fortune. “How about a safe-deposit box?” Doesn’t your family have stock in half the banks
in America?
“That would involve paperwork and bank employees; I’d prefer a trusted friend. And I know you can keep
secrets.” Solomon reached in his pocket and pulled out a small package, handing it to Langdon.
Considering the dramatic preamble, Langdon had expected something more impressive. The package was a
small cube-shaped box, about three inches square, wrapped in faded brown packing paper and tied with
twine. From the package’s heavy weight and size, it felt like its contents must be rock or metal. This is it?
Langdon turned the box in his hands, now noticing the twine had been carefully secured on one side with an
embossed wax seal, like an ancient edict. The seal bore a double-headed phoenix with the number 33
emblazoned on its chest—the traditional symbol of the highest degree of Freemasonry.
“Really, Peter,” Langdon said, a lopsided grin creeping across his face. “You’re the Worshipful Master of a
Masonic lodge, not the pope. Sealing packages with your ring?”
Solomon glanced down at his gold ring and gave a chuckle. “I didn’t seal this package, Robert. My greatgrandfather
did. Almost a century ago.”
Langdon’s head snapped up. “What?!”
Solomon held up his ring finger. “This Masonic ring was his. After that, it was my grandfather’s, then my
father’s . . . and eventually mine.”
Langdon held up the package. “Your great-grandfather wrapped this a century ago and nobody has opened
it?”
“That’s right.”
“But . . . why not?”
Solomon smiled. “Because it’s not time.”
Langdon stared. “Time for what?”
“Robert, I know this will sound odd, but the less you know, the better. Just put this package somewhere safe,
and please tell no one I gave it to you.”
Langdon searched his mentor’s eyes for a glint of playfulness. Solomon had a propensity for dramatics, and
Langdon wondered if he wasn’t being played a bit here. “Peter, are you sure this isn’t just a clever ploy to
make me think I’ve been entrusted with some kind of ancient Masonic secret so I’ll be curious and decide to
join?”
“The Masons do not recruit, Robert, you know that. Besides, you’ve already told me you’d prefer not to
join.”
This was true. Langdon had great respect for Masonic philosophy and symbolism, and yet he had decided
never to be initiated; the order’s vows of secrecy would prevent him from discussing Freemasonry with his
students. It had been for this same reason that Socrates had refused to formally participate in the Eleusinian
Mysteries.
As Langdon now regarded the mysterious little box and its Masonic seal, he could not help but ask the
obvious question. “Why not entrust this to one of your Masonic brothers?”
“Let’s just say I have an instinct it would be safer stored outside the brotherhood. And please don’t let the
size of this package fool you. If what my father told me is correct, then it contains something of substantial
power.” He paused. “A talisman, of sorts.”
Did he say a talisman? By definition, a talisman was an object with magical powers. Traditionally, talismans
were used for bringing luck, warding off evil spirits, or aiding in ancient rituals. “Peter, you do realize that
talismans went out of vogue in the Middle Ages, right?”
Peter laid a patient hand on Langdon’s shoulder. “I know how this sounds, Robert. I’ve known you a long
time, and your skepticism is one of your greatest strengths as an academic. It is also your greatest weakness. I
know you well enough to know you’re not a man I can ask to believe . . . only to trust. So now I am asking
you to trust me when I tell you this talisman is powerful. I was told it can imbue its possessor with the ability
to bring order from chaos.”
Langdon could only stare. The idea of “order from chaos” was one of the great Masonic axioms. Ordo ab
chao. Even so, the claim that a talisman could impart any power at all was absurd, much less the power to
bring order from chaos.
“This talisman,” Solomon continued, “would be dangerous in the wrong hands, and unfortunately, I have
reason to believe powerful people want to steal it from me.” His eyes were as serious as Langdon could ever
recall. “I would like you to keep it safe for me for a while. Can you do that?”
That night, Langdon sat alone at his kitchen table with the package and tried to imagine what could possibly
be inside. In the end, he simply chalked it up to Peter’s eccentricity and locked the package in his library’s
wall safe, eventually forgetting all about it.
That was . . . until this morning.
The phone call from the man with the southern accent.
“Oh, Professor, I almost forgot!” the assistant had said after giving Langdon the specifics of his travel
arrangements to D.C. “There is one more thing Mr. Solomon requested.”
“Yes?” Langdon replied, his mind already moving to the lecture he had just agreed to give.
“Mr. Solomon left a note here for you.” The man began reading awkwardly, as if trying to decipher Peter’s
penmanship. “‘Please ask Robert . . . to bring . . . the small, sealed package I gave him many years ago.’ ”
The man paused. “Does this make any sense to you?”
Langdon felt surprised as he recalled the small box that had been sitting in his wall safe all this time.
“Actually, yes. I know what Peter means.”
“And you can bring it?”
“Of course. Tell Peter I’ll bring it.”
“Wonderful.” The assistant sounded relieved. “Enjoy your speech tonight. Safe travels.”
Before leaving home, Langdon had dutifully retrieved the wrapped package from the back of his safe and
placed it in his shoulder bag.
Now he was standing in the U.S. Capitol, feeling certain of only one thing. Peter Solomon would be horrified
to know how badly Langdon had failed him.
CHAPTER 25
My God, Katherine was right. As usual.
Trish Dunne stared in amazement at the search-spider results that were materializing on the plasma wall
before her. She had doubted the search would turn up any results at all, but in fact, she now had over a dozen
hits. And they were still coming in.
One entry in particular looked quite promising.
Trish turned and shouted in the direction of the library. “Katherine? I think you’ll want to see this!”
It had been a couple of years since Trish had run a search spider like this, and tonight’s results astounded her.
A few years ago, this search would have been a dead end. Now, however, it seemed that the quantity of
searchable digital material in the world had exploded to the point where someone could find literally
anything. Incredibly, one of the keywords was a word Trish had never even heard before . . . and the search
even found that.
Katherine rushed through the control-room door. “What have you got?”
“A bunch of candidates.” Trish motioned to the plasma wall. “Every one of these documents contains all of
your key phrases verbatim.”
Katherine tucked her hair behind her ear and scanned the list.
“Before you get too excited,” Trish added, “I can assure you that most of these documents are not what
you’re looking for. They’re what we call black holes. Look at the file sizes. Absolutely enormous. They’re
things like compressed archives of millions of e-mails, giant unabridged encyclopedia sets, global message
boards that have been running for years, and so forth. By virtue of their size and diverse content, these files
contain so many potential keywords that they suck in any search engine that comes anywhere near them.”
Katherine pointed to one of the entries near the top of the list. “How about that one?”
Trish smiled. Katherine was a step ahead, having found the sole file on the list that had a small file size.
“Good eyes. Yeah, that’s really our only candidate so far. In fact, that file’s so small it can’t be more than a
page or so.”
“Open it.” Katherine’s tone was intense.
Trish could not imagine a one-page document containing all the strange search strings Katherine had
provided. Nonetheless, when she clicked and opened the document, the key phrases were there . . . crystal
clear and easy to spot in the text.
Katherine strode over, eyes riveted to the plasma wall. “This document is . . . redacted?”
Trish nodded. “Welcome to the world of digitized text.”
Automatic redaction had become standard practice when offering digitized documents. Redaction was a
process wherein a server allowed a user to search the entire text, but then revealed only a small portion of
it—a teaser of sorts—only that text immediately flanking the requested keywords. By omitting the vast
majority of the text, the server avoided copyright infringement and also sent the user an intriguing message: I
have the information you’re searching for, but if you want the rest of it, you’ll have to buy it from me.
“As you can see,” Trish said, scrolling through the heavily abridged page, “the document contains all of your
key phrases.”
Katherine stared up at the redaction in silence.
Trish gave her a minute and then scrolled back to the top of the page. Each of Katherine’s key phrases was
underlined in capital letters and accompanied by a small sample of teaser text—the two words that appeared
on either side of the requested phrase.
Trish could not imagine what this document was referring to. And what the heck is a “symbolon”?
Katherine stepped eagerly toward the screen. “Where did this document come from? Who wrote it?”
Trish was already working on it. “Give me a second. I’m trying to chase down the source.”
“I need to know who wrote this,” Katherine repeated, her voice intense. “I need to see the rest of it.”
“I’m trying,” Trish said, startled by the edge in Katherine’s tone.
Strangely, the file’s location was not displaying as a traditional Web address but rather as a numeric Internet
Protocol address. “I can’t unmask the IP,” Trish said. “The domain name’s not coming up. Hold on.” She
pulled up her terminal window. “I’ll run a traceroute.”
Trish typed the sequence of commands to ping all the “hops” between her control room’s machine and
whatever machine was storing this document.
“Tracing now,” she said, executing the command.
Traceroutes were extremely fast, and a long list of network devices appeared almost instantly on the plasma
wall. Trish scanned down . . . down . . . through the path of routers and switches that connected her machine
to . . .
What the hell? Her trace had stopped before reaching the document’s server. Her ping, for some reason, had
hit a network device that swallowed it rather than bouncing it back. “It looks like my traceroute got blocked,”
Trish said. Is that even possible?
“Run it again.”
Trish launched another traceroute and got the same result. “Nope. Dead end. It’s like this document is on a
server that is untraceable.” She looked at the last few hops before the dead end. “I can tell you, though, it’s
located somewhere in the D.C. area.”
“You’re kidding.”
“Not surprising,” Trish said. “These spider programs spiral out geographically, meaning the first results are
always local. Besides, one of your search strings was ‘Washington, D.C.’ ”
“How about a ‘who is’ search?” Katherine prompted. “Wouldn’t that tell you who owns the domain?”
A bit lowbrow, but not a bad idea. Trish navigated to the “who is” database and ran a search for the IP,
hoping to match the cryptic numbers to an actual domain name. Her frustration was now tempered by rising
curiosity. Who has this document? The “who is” results appeared quickly, showing no match, and Trish held
up her hands in defeat. “It’s like this IP address doesn’t exist. I can’t get any information about it at all.”
“Obviously the IP exists. We’ve just searched a document that’s stored there!”
True. And yet whoever had this document apparently preferred not to share his or her identity. “I’m not sure
what to tell you. Systems traces aren’t really my thing, and unless you want to call in someone with hacking
skills, I’m at a loss.”
“Do you know someone?”
Trish turned and stared at her boss. “Katherine, I was kidding. It’s not exactly a great idea.”
“But it is done?” She checked her watch.
“Um, yeah . . . all the time. Technically it’s pretty easy.”
“Who do you know?”
“Hackers?” Trish laughed nervously. “Like half the guys at my old job.”
“Anyone you trust?”
Is she serious? Trish could see Katherine was dead serious. “Well, yeah,” she said hurriedly. “I know this
one guy we could call. He was our systems security specialist—serious computer geek. He wanted to date
me, which kind of sucked, but he’s a good guy, and I’d trust him. Also, he does freelance.”
“Can he be discreet?”
“He’s a hacker. Of course he can be discreet. That’s what he does. But I’m sure he’d want at least a thousand
bucks to even look—”
“Call him. Offer him double for fast results.”
Trish was not sure what made her more uncomfortable—helping Katherine Solomon hire a hacker . . . or
calling a guy who probably still found it impossible to believe a pudgy, redheaded metasystems analyst
would rebuff his romantic advances. “You’re sure about this?”
“Use the phone in the library,” Katherine said. “It’s got a blocked number. And obviously don’t use my
name.”
“Right.” Trish headed for the door but paused when she heard Katherine’s iPhone chirp. With luck, the
incoming text message might be information that would grant Trish a reprieve from this distasteful task. She
waited as Katherine fished the iPhone from her lab coat’s pocket and eyed the screen.
Katherine Solomon felt a wave of relief to see the name on her iPhone.
At last.
PETER SOLOMON
“It’s a text message from my brother,” she said, glancing over at Trish.
Trish looked hopeful. “So maybe we should ask him about all this . . . before we call a hacker?”
Katherine eyed the redacted document on the plasma wall and heard Dr. Abaddon’s voice. That which your
brother believes is hidden in D.C. . . . it can be found. Katherine had no idea what to believe anymore, and
this document represented information about the far-fetched ideas with which Peter had apparently become
obsessed.
Katherine shook her head. “I want to know who wrote this and where it’s located. Make the call.”
Trish frowned and headed for the door.
Whether or not this document would be able to explain the mystery of what her brother had told Dr.
Abaddon, there was at least one mystery that had been solved today. Her brother had finally learned how to
use the text-messaging feature on the iPhone Katherine had given him.
“And alert the media,” Katherine called after Trish. “The great Peter Solomon just sent his first text
message.”
In a strip-mall parking lot across the street from the SMSC, Mal’akh stood beside his limo, stretching his legs
and waiting for the phone call he knew would be coming. The rain had stopped, and a winter moon had
started to break through the clouds. It was the same moon that had shone down on Mal’akh through the
oculus of the House of the Temple three months ago during his initiation.
The world looks different tonight.
As he waited, his stomach growled again. His two-day fast, although uncomfortable, was critical to his
preparation. Such were the ancient ways. Soon all physical discomforts would be inconsequential.
As Mal’akh stood in the cold night air, he chuckled to see that fate had deposited him, rather ironically,
directly in front of a tiny church. Here, nestled between Sterling Dental and a minimart, was a tiny sanctuary.
LORD’S HOUSE OF GLORY.
Mal’akh gazed at the window, which displayed part of the church’s doctrinal statement: WE BELIEVE
THAT JESUS CHRIST WAS BEGOTTEN BY THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND BORN OF THE VIRGIN
MARY, AND IS BOTH TRUE MAN AND GOD.
Mal’akh smiled. Yes, Jesus is indeed both—man and God—but a virgin birth is not the prerequisite for
divinity. That is not how it happens.
The ring of a cell phone cut the night air, quickening his pulse. The phone that was now ringing was
Mal’akh’s own—a cheap disposable phone he had purchased yesterday. The caller ID indicated it was the
call he had been anticipating.
A local call, Mal’akh mused, gazing out across Silver Hill Road toward the faint moonlit outline of a zigzag
roofline over the treetops. Mal’akh flipped open his phone.
“This is Dr. Abaddon,” he said, tuning his voice deeper.
“It’s Katherine,” the woman’s voice said. “I finally heard from my brother.”
“Oh, I’m relieved. How is he?”
“He’s on his way to my lab right now,” Katherine said. “In fact, he suggested you join us.”
“I’m sorry?” Mal’akh feigned hesitation. “In your . . . lab?”
“He must trust you deeply. He never invites anyone back there.”
“I suppose maybe he thinks a visit might help our discussions, but I feel like it’s an intrusion.”
“If my brother says you’re welcome, then you’re welcome. Besides, he said he has a lot to tell us both, and
I’d love to get to the bottom of what’s going on.”
“Very well, then. Where exactly is your lab?”
“At the Smithsonian Museum Support Center. Do you know where that is?”
“No,” Mal’akh said, staring across the parking lot at the complex. “I’m actually in my car right now, and I
have a guidance system. What’s the address?”
“Forty-two-ten Silver Hill Road.”
“Okay, hold on. I’ll type it in.” Mal’akh waited for ten seconds and then said, “Ah, good news, it looks like
I’m closer than I thought. The GPS says I’m only about ten minutes away.”
“Great. I’ll phone the security gate and tell them you’re coming through.”
“Thank you.”
“I’ll see you shortly.”
Mal’akh pocketed the disposable phone and looked out toward the SMSC. Was I rude to invite myself?
Smiling, he now pulled out Peter Solomon’s iPhone and admired the text message he had sent Katherine
several minutes earlier.
Got your messages. All’s fine. Busy day. Forgot appointment with Dr. Abaddon. Sorry not to mention him
sooner. Long story. Am headed to lab now. If available, have Dr. Abaddon join us inside. I trust him fully,
and I have much to tell you both. —Peter
Not surprisingly, Peter’s iPhone now pinged with an incoming reply from Katherine.
peter, congrats on learning to text! relieved you’re okay. spoke to dr. A., and he is coming to lab. see you
shortly! —k
Clutching Solomon’s iPhone, Mal’akh crouched down under his limousine and wedged the phone between
the front tire and the pavement. This phone had served Mal’akh well . . . but now it was time it became
untraceable. He climbed behind the wheel, put the car in gear, and crept forward until he heard the sharp
crack of the iPhone imploding.
Mal’akh put the car back in park and stared out at the distant silhouette of the SMSC. Ten minutes. Peter
Solomon’s sprawling warehouse housed over thirty million treasures, but Mal’akh had come here tonight to
obliterate only the two most valuable.
All of Katherine Solomon’s research.
And Katherine Solomon herself.
CHAPTER 26
Professor Langdon?” Sato said. “You look like you’ve seen a ghost. Are you okay?”
Langdon hoisted his daybag higher onto his shoulder and laid his hand on top of it, as if somehow this might
better hide the cube-shaped package he was carrying. He could feel his face had gone ashen. “I’m . . . just
worried about Peter.”
Sato cocked her head, eyeing him askew.
Langdon felt a sudden wariness that Sato’s involvement tonight might relate to this small package that
Solomon had entrusted to him. Peter had warned Langdon: Powerful people want to steal this. It would be
dangerous in the wrong hands. Langdon couldn’t imagine why the CIA would want a little box containing a
talisman . . . or even what the talisman could be. Ordo ab chao?
Sato stepped closer, her black eyes probing. “I sense you’ve had a revelation?”
Langdon felt himself sweating now. “No, not exactly.”
“What’s on your mind?”
“I just . . .” Langdon hesitated, having no idea what to say. He had no intention of revealing the existence of
the package in his bag, and yet if Sato took him to the CIA, his bag most certainly would be searched on the
way in. “Actually . . .” he fibbed, “I have another idea about the numbers on Peter’s hand.”
Sato’s expression revealed nothing. “Yes?” She glanced over at Anderson now, who was just arriving from
greeting the forensics team that had finally arrived.
Langdon swallowed hard and crouched down beside the hand, wondering what he could possibly come up
with to tell them. You’re a teacher, Robert—improvise! He took one last look at the seven tiny symbols,
hoping for some sort of inspiration.
Nothing. Blank.
As Langdon’s eidetic memory skimmed through his mental encyclopedia of symbols, he could find only one
possible point to make. It was something that had occurred to him initially, but had seemed unlikely. At the
moment, however, he had to buy time to think.
“Well,” he began, “a symbologist’s first clue that he’s on the wrong track when deciphering symbols and
codes is when he starts interpreting symbols using multiple symbolic languages. For example, when I told
you this text was Roman and Arabic, that was a poor analysis because I used multiple symbolic systems. The
same is true for Roman and runic.”
Sato crossed her arms and arched her eyebrows as if to say, “Go on.”
“In general, communications are made in one language, not multiple languages, and so a symbologist’s first
job with any text is to find a single consistent symbolic system that applies to the entire text.”
“And you see a single system now?”
“Well, yes . . . and no.” Langdon’s experience with the rotational symmetry of ambigrams had taught him
that symbols sometimes had meanings from multiple angles. In this case, he realized there was indeed a way
to view all seven symbols in a single language. “If we manipulated the hand slightly, the language will
become consistent.” Eerily, the manipulation Langdon was about to perform was one that seemed to have
been suggested by Peter’s captor already when he spoke the ancient Hermetic adage. As above, so below.
Langdon felt a chill as he reached out and grasped the wooden base on which Peter’s hand was secured.
Gently, he turned the base upside down so that Peter’s extended fingers were now pointing straight down.
The symbols on the palm instantly transformed themselves.
“From this angle,” Langdon said, “X-I-I-I becomes a valid Roman numeral—thirteen. Moreover, the rest of
the characters can be interpreted using the Roman alphabet—SBB.” Langdon assumed the analysis would
elicit blank shrugs, but Anderson’s expression immediately changed.
“SBB?” the chief demanded.
Sato turned to Anderson. “If I’m not mistaken, that sounds like a familiar numbering system here in the
Capitol Building.”
Anderson looked pale. “It is.”
Sato gave a grim smile and nodded to Anderson. “Chief, follow me, please. I’d like a word in private.”
As Director Sato led Chief Anderson out of earshot, Langdon stood alone in bewilderment. What the hell is
going on here? And what is SBB XIII?
Chief Anderson wondered how this night could possibly get any stranger. The hand says SBB13? He was
amazed any outsider had even heard of SBB . . . much less SBB13. Peter Solomon’s index finger, it seemed,
was not directing them upward as it had appeared . . . but rather was pointing in quite the opposite direction.
Director Sato led Anderson over to a quiet area near the bronze statue of Thomas Jefferson. “Chief,” she
said, “I trust you know exactly where SBB Thirteen is located?”
“Of course.”
“Do you know what’s inside?”
“No, not without looking. I don’t think it’s been used in decades.”
“Well, you’re going to open it up.”
Anderson did not appreciate being told what he would do in his own building. “Ma’am, that may be
problematic. I’ll have to check the assignment roster first. As you know, most of the lower levels are private
offices or storage, and security protocol regarding private—”
“You will unlock SBB Thirteen for me,” Sato said, “or I will call OS and send in a team with a battering
ram.”
Anderson stared at her a long moment and then pulled out his radio, raising it to his lips. “This is Anderson. I
need someone to unlock the SBB. Have someone meet me there in five minutes.”
The voice that replied sounded confused. “Chief, confirming you said SBB?”
“Correct. SBB. Send someone immediately. And I’ll need a flashlight.” He stowed his radio. Anderson’s
heart was pounding as Sato stepped closer, lowering her voice even further.
“Chief, time is short,” she whispered, “and I want you to get us down to SBB Thirteen as quickly as
possible.”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“I also need something else from you.”
In addition to breaking and entering? Anderson was in no position to protest, and yet it had not gone
unnoticed by him that Sato had arrived within minutes of Peter’s hand appearing in the Rotunda, and that she
now was using the situation to demand access to private sections of the U.S. Capitol. She seemed so far
ahead of the curve tonight that she was practically defining it.
Sato motioned across the room toward the professor. “The duffel bag on Langdon’s shoulder.”
Anderson glanced over. “What about it?”
“I assume your staff X-rayed that bag when Langdon entered the building?”
“Of course. All bags are scanned.”
“I want to see that X-ray. I want to know what’s in his bag.”
Anderson looked over at the bag Langdon had been carrying all evening. “But . . . wouldn’t it be easier just
to ask him?”
“What part of my request was unclear?”
Anderson pulled out his radio again and called in her request. Sato gave Anderson her BlackBerry address
and requested that his team e-mail her a digital copy of the X-ray as soon as they had located it. Reluctantly
Anderson complied.
Forensics was now collecting the severed hand for the Capitol Police, but Sato ordered them to deliver it
directly to her team at Langley. Anderson was too tired to protest. He had just been run over by a tiny
Japanese steamroller.
“And I want that ring,” Sato called over to Forensics.
The chief technician seemed ready to question her but thought better of it. He removed the gold ring from
Peter’s hand, placed it in a clear specimen bag, and gave it to Sato. She slipped it into her jacket pocket, and
then turned to Langdon.
“We’re leaving, Professor. Bring your things.”
“Where are we going?” Langdon replied.
“Just follow Mr. Anderson.”
Yes, Anderson thought, and follow me closely. The SBB was a section of the Capitol that few ever visited. To
reach it, they would pass through a sprawling labyrinth of tiny chambers and tight passages buried beneath
the crypt. Abraham Lincoln’s youngest son, Tad, had once gotten lost down there and almost perished.
Anderson was starting to suspect that if Sato had her way, Robert Langdon might suffer a similar fate.
CHAPTER 27
Systems security specialist Mark Zoubianis had always prided himself on his ability to multitask. At the
moment, he was seated on his futon along with a TV remote, a cordless phone, a laptop, a PDA, and a large
bowl of Pirate’s Booty. With one eye on the muted Redskins game and one eye on his laptop, Zoubianis was
speaking on his Bluetooth headset with a woman he had not heard from in over a year.
Leave it to Trish Dunne to call on the night of a play-off game.
Confirming her social ineptitude yet again, his former colleague had chosen the Redskins game as a perfect
moment to chat him up and request a favor. After some brief small talk about the old days and how she
missed his great jokes, Trish had gotten to her point: she was trying to unmask a hidden IP address, probably
that of a secure server in the D.C. area. The server contained a small text document, and she wanted access to
it . . . or at the very least, some information about whose document it was.
Right guy, wrong timing, he had told her. Trish then showered him with her finest geek flattery, most of
which was true, and before Zoubianis knew it, he was typing a strange-looking IP address into his laptop.
Zoubianis took one look at the number and immediately felt uneasy. “Trish, this IP has a funky format. It’s
written in a protocol that isn’t even publicly available yet. It’s probably gov intel or military.”
“Military?” Trish laughed. “Believe me, I just pulled a redacted document off this server, and it was not
military.” Zoubianis pulled up his terminal window and tried a traceroute. “You said your traceroute died?”
“Yeah. Twice. Same hop.”
“Mine, too.” He pulled up a diagnostic probe and launched it. “And what’s so interesting about this IP?”
“I ran a delegator that tapped a search engine at this IP and pulled a redacted document. I need to see the rest
of the document. I’m happy to pay them for it, but I can’t figure out who owns the IP or how to access it.”
Zoubianis frowned at his screen. “Are you sure about this? I’m running a diagnostic, and this firewall coding
looks . . . pretty serious.”
“That’s why you get the big bucks.”
Zoubianis considered it. They’d offered him a fortune for a job this easy. “One question, Trish. Why are you
so hot on this?”
Trish paused. “I’m doing a favor for a friend.”
“Must be a special friend.”
“She is.”
Zoubianis chuckled and held his tongue. I knew it.
“Look,” Trish said, sounding impatient. “Are you good enough to unmask this IP? Yes or no?”
“Yes, I’m good enough. And yes, I know you’re playing me like a fiddle.”
“How long will it take you?”
“Not long,” he said, typing as he spoke. “I should be able to get into a machine on their network within ten
minutes or so. Once I’m in and know what I’m looking at, I’ll call you back.”
“I appreciate it. So, are you doing well?”
Now she asks? “Trish, for God’s sake, you called me on the night of a play-off game and now you want to
chat? Do you want me to hack this IP or not?”
“Thanks, Mark. I appreciate it. I’ll be waiting for your call.”
“Fifteen minutes.” Zoubianis hung up, grabbed his bowl of Pirate’s Booty, and unmuted the game.
Women.
CHAPTER 28
Where are they taking me?
As Langdon hurried with Anderson and Sato into the depths of the Capitol, he felt his heart rate increasing
with each downward step. They had begun their journey through the west portico of the Rotunda, descending
a marble staircase and then doubling back through a wide doorway into the famous chamber directly beneath
the Rotunda floor.
The Capitol Crypt.
The air was heavier here, and Langdon was already feeling claustrophobic. The crypt’s low ceiling and soft
uplighting accentuated the robust girth of the forty Doric columns required to support the vast stone floor
directly overhead. Relax, Robert.
“This way,” Anderson said, moving quickly as he angled to the left across the wide circular space.
Thankfully, this particular crypt contained no bodies. Instead it contained several statues, a model of the
Capitol, and a low storage area for the wooden catafalque on which coffins were laid for state funerals. The
entourage hurried through, without even a glance at the four-pointed marble compass in the center of the
floor where the Eternal Flame had once burned.
Anderson seemed to be in a hurry, and Sato once again had her head buried in her BlackBerry. Cellular
service, Langdon had heard, was boosted and broadcast to all corners of the Capitol Building to support the
hundreds of government phone calls that took place here every day.
After diagonally crossing the crypt, the group entered a dimly lit foyer and began winding through a
convoluted series of hallways and dead ends. The warren of passages contained numbered doorways, each of
which bore an identification number. Langdon read the doors as they snaked their way around.
S154 . . . S153 . . . S152 . . .
He had no idea what lay behind these doors, but at least one thing now seemed clear—the meaning of the
tattoo on Peter Solomon’s palm.
SBB13 appeared to be a numbered doorway somewhere in the bowels of the U.S. Capitol Building.
“What are all these doorways?” Langdon asked, clutching his daybag tightly to his ribs and wondering what
Solomon’s tiny package could possibly have to do with a door marked SBB13.
“Offices and storage,” Anderson said. “Private offices and storage,” he added, glancing back at Sato.
Sato did not even glance up from her BlackBerry.
“They look tiny,” Langdon said.
“Glorified closets, most of them, but they’re still some of the most sought-after real estate in D.C. This is the
heart of the original Capitol, and the old Senate chamber is two stories above us.”
“And SBB Thirteen?” Langdon asked. “Whose office is that?”
“Nobody’s. The SBB is a private storage area, and I must say, I’m puzzled how—”
“Chief Anderson,” Sato interrupted without looking up from her BlackBerry. “Just take us there, please.”
Anderson clenched his jaw and guided them on in silence through what was now feeling like a hybrid selfstorage
facility and epic labyrinth. On almost every wall, directional signs pointed back and forth, apparently
attempting to locate specific office blocks in this network of hallways.
S142 to S152 . . .
ST1 to ST70 . . .
H1 to H166 & HT1 to HT67 . . .
Langdon doubted he could ever find his way out of here alone. This place is a maze. From all he could
gather, office numbers began with either an S or an H depending on whether they were on the Senate side of
the building or the House side. Areas designated ST and HT were apparently on a level that Anderson called
Terrace Level.
Still no signs for SBB.
Finally they arrived at a heavy steel security door with a key-card entry box.
SB Level
Langdon sensed they were getting closer.
Anderson reached for his key card but hesitated, looking uncomfortable with Sato’s demands.
“Chief,” Sato prompted. “We don’t have all night.”
Anderson reluctantly inserted his key card. The steel door released. He pushed it open, and they stepped
through into the foyer beyond. The heavy door clicked shut behind them.
Langdon wasn’t sure what he had hoped to see in this foyer, but the sight in front of him was definitely not it.
He was staring at a descending stairway. “Down again?” he said, stopping short. “There’s a level under the
crypt?”
“Yes,” Anderson said. “SB stands for ‘Senate Basement.’ ”
Langdon groaned. Terrific.
CHAPTER 29
The headlights winding up the SMSC’s wooded access road were the first the guard had seen in the last
hour. Dutifully, he turned down the volume on his portable TV set and stashed his snacks beneath the
counter. Lousy timing. The Redskins were completing their opening drive, and he didn’t want to miss it.
As the car drew closer, the guard checked the name on the notepad in front of him.
Dr. Christopher Abaddon.
Katherine Solomon had just called to alert Security of this guest’s imminent arrival. The guard had no idea
who this doctor might be, but he was apparently very good at doctoring; he was arriving in a black stretch
limousine. The long, sleek vehicle rolled to a stop beside the guardhouse, and the driver’s tinted window
lowered silently.
“Good evening,” the chauffeur said, doffing his cap. He was a powerfully built man with a shaved head. He
was listening to the football game on his radio. “I have Dr. Christopher Abaddon for Ms. Katherine
Solomon?”
The guard nodded. “Identification, please.”
The chauffeur looked surprised. “I’m sorry, didn’t Ms. Solomon call ahead?”
The guard nodded, stealing a glance at the television. “I’m still required to scan and log visitor identification.
Sorry, regulations. I’ll need to see the doctor’s ID.”
“Not a problem.” The chauffeur turned backward in his seat and spoke in hushed tones through the privacy
screen. As he did, the guard stole another peek at the game. The Redskins were breaking from the huddle
now, and he hoped to get this limo through before the next play.
The chauffeur turned forward again and held out the ID that he’d apparently just received through the
privacy screen.
The guard took the card and quickly scanned it into his system. The D.C. driver’s license showed one
Christopher Abaddon from Kalorama Heights. The photo depicted a handsome blond gentleman wearing a
blue blazer, a necktie, and a satin pocket square. Who the hell wears a pocket square to the DMV?
A muffled cheer went up from the television set, and the guard wheeled just in time to see a Redskins player
dancing in the end zone, his finger pointed skyward. “I missed it,” the guard grumbled, returning to the
window.
“Okay,” he said, returning the license to the chauffeur. “You’re all set.”
As the limo pulled through, the guard returned to his TV, hoping for a replay.
As Mal’akh drove his limo up the winding access road, he couldn’t help but smile. Peter Solomon’s secret
museum had been simple to breach. Sweeter still, tonight was the second time in twenty-four hours that
Mal’akh had broken into one of Solomon’s private spaces. Last night, a similar visit had been made to
Solomon’s home.
Although Peter Solomon had a magnificent country estate in Potomac, he spent much of his time in the city
at his penthouse apartment at the exclusive Dorchester Arms. His building, like most that catered to the
super-rich, was a veritable fortress. High walls. Guard gates. Guest lists. Secured underground parking.
Mal’akh had driven this very limousine up to the building’s guardhouse, doffed his chauffeur’s cap from his
shaved head, and proclaimed, “I have Dr. Christopher Abaddon. He is an invited guest of Mr. Peter
Solomon.” Mal’akh spoke the words as if he were announcing the Duke of York.
The guard checked a log and then Abaddon’s ID. “Yes, I see Mr. Solomon is expecting Dr. Abaddon.” He
pressed a button and the gate opened. “Mr. Solomon is in the penthouse apartment. Have your guest use the
last elevator on the right. It goes all the way up.”
“Thank you.” Mal’akh tipped his hat and drove through.
As he wound deep into the garage, he scanned for security cameras. Nothing. Apparently, those who lived
here were neither the kind of people who broke into cars nor the kind of people who appreciated being
watched.
Mal’akh parked in a dark corner near the elevators, lowered the divider between the driver’s compartment
and the passenger compartment, and slithered through the opening into the back of the limo. Once in back, he
got rid of his chauffeur’s cap and donned his blond wig. Straightening his jacket and tie, he checked the
mirror to make sure he had not smeared his makeup. Mal’akh was not about to take any chances. Not tonight.
I have waited too long for this.
Seconds later, Mal’akh was stepping into the private elevator. The ride to the top was silent and smooth.
When the door opened, he found himself in an elegant, private foyer. His host was already waiting.
“Dr. Abaddon, welcome.”
Mal’akh looked into the man’s famous gray eyes and felt his heart begin to race. “Mr. Solomon, I appreciate
your seeing me.”
“Please, call me Peter.” The two men shook hands. As Mal’akh gripped the older man’s palm, he saw the
gold Masonic ring on Solomon’s hand . . . the same hand that had once aimed a gun at Mal’akh. A voice
whispered from Mal’akh’s distant past. If you pull that trigger, I will haunt you forever.
“Please come in,” Solomon said, ushering Mal’akh into an elegant living room whose expansive windows
offered an astonishing view of the Washington skyline.
“Do I smell tea steeping?” Mal’akh asked as he entered.
Solomon looked impressed. “My parents always greeted guests with tea. I’ve carried on that tradition.” He
led Mal’akh into the living room, where a tea service was waiting in front of the fire. “Cream and sugar?”
“Black, thank you.”
Again Solomon looked impressed. “A purist.” He poured them both a cup of black tea. “You said you needed
to discuss something with me that was sensitive in nature and could be discussed only in private.”
“Thank you. I appreciate your time.”
“You and I are Masonic brothers now. We have a bond. Tell me how I can help you.”
“First, I would like to thank you for the honor of the thirty-third degree a few months ago. This is deeply
meaningful to me.”
“I’m glad, but please know that those decisions are not mine alone. They are by vote of the Supreme
Council.”
“Of course.” Mal’akh suspected Peter Solomon had probably voted against him, but within the Masons, as
with all things, money was power. Mal’akh, after achieving the thirty-second degree in his own lodge, had
waited only a month before making a multimillion-dollar donation to charity in the name of the Masonic
Grand Lodge. The unsolicited act of selflessness, as Mal’akh anticipated, was enough to earn him a quick
invitation into the elite thirty-third degree. And yet I have learned no secrets.
Despite the age-old whispers—“All is revealed at the thirty-third degree”—Mal’akh had been told nothing
new, nothing of relevance to his quest. But he had never expected to be told. The inner circle of Freemasonry
contained smaller circles still . . . circles Mal’akh would not see for years, if ever. He didn’t care. His
initiation had served its purpose. Something unique had happened within that Temple Room, and it had given
Mal’akh power over all of them. I no longer play by your rules.
“You do realize,” Mal’akh said, sipping his tea, “that you and I met many years ago.”
Solomon looked surprised. “Really? I don’t recall.”
“It was quite a long time ago.” And Christopher Abaddon is not my real name.
“I’m so sorry. My mind must be getting old. Remind me how I know you?”
Mal’akh smiled one last time at the man he hated more than any other man on earth. “It’s unfortunate that
you don’t recall.”
In one fluid motion, Mal’akh pulled a small device from his pocket and extended it outward, driving it hard
into the man’s chest. There was a flash of blue light, the sharp sizzle of the stun-gun discharge, and a gasp of
pain as one million volts of electricity coursed through Peter Solomon’s body. His eyes went wide, and he
slumped motionless in his chair. Mal’akh stood up now, towering over the man, salivating like a lion about to
consume his injured prey.
Solomon was gasping, straining to breathe.
Mal’akh saw fear in his victim’s eyes and wondered how many people had ever seen the great Peter Solomon
cower. Mal’akh savored the scene for several long seconds. He took a sip of tea, waiting for the man to catch
his breath.
Solomon was twitching, attempting to speak. “Wh-why?” he finally managed.
“Why do you think?” Mal’akh demanded.
Solomon looked truly bewildered. “You want . . . money?”
Money? Mal’akh laughed and took another sip of tea. “I gave the Masons millions of dollars; I have no need
of wealth.” I come for wisdom, and he offers me wealth.
“Then what . . . do you want?”
“You possess a secret. You will share it with me tonight.”
Solomon struggled to lift his chin so he could look Mal’akh in the eye. “I don’t . . . understand.”
“No more lies!” Mal’akh shouted, advancing to within inches of the paralyzed man. “I know what is hidden
here in Washington.”
Solomon’s gray eyes were defiant. “I have no idea what you’re talking about!”
Mal’akh took another sip of tea and set the cup on a coaster. “You spoke those same words to me ten years
ago, on the night of your mother’s death.”
Solomon’s eyes shot wide open. “You . . . ?”
“She didn’t have to die. If you had given me what I demanded . . .”
The older man’s face contorted in a mask of horrified recognition . . . and disbelief.
“I warned you,” Mal’akh said, “if you pulled the trigger, I would haunt you forever.”
“But you’re—”
Mal’akh lunged, driving the Taser hard into Solomon’s chest again. There was another flash of blue light,
and Solomon went completely limp.
Mal’akh put the Taser back in his pocket and calmly finished his tea. When he was done, he dabbed his lips
with a monogrammed linen napkin and peered down at his victim. “Shall we go?”
Solomon’s body was motionless, but his eyes were wide and engaged.
Mal’akh got down close and whispered in the man’s ear. “I’m taking you to a place where only truth
remains.”
Without another word, Mal’akh wadded up the monogrammed napkin and stuffed it into Solomon’s mouth.
Then he hoisted the limp man onto his broad shoulders and headed for the private elevator. On his way out,
he picked up Solomon’s iPhone and keys from the hall table.
Tonight you will tell me all your secrets, Mal’akh thought. Including why you left me for dead all those years
ago.
CHAPTER 30
SB level.
Senate basement.
Robert Langdon’s claustrophobia gripped him more tightly with every hastening step of their descent. As
they moved deeper into the building’s original foundation, the air became heavy, and the ventilation seemed
nonexistent. The walls down here were an uneven blend of stone and yellow brick.
Director Sato typed on her BlackBerry as they walked. Langdon sensed a suspicion in her guarded manner,
but the feeling was quickly becoming reciprocal. Sato still hadn’t told him how she knew Langdon was here
tonight. An issue of national security? He had a hard time understanding any relation between ancient
mysticism and national security. Then again, he had a hard time understanding much of anything about this
situation.
Peter Solomon entrusted me with a talisman . . . a deluded lunatic tricked me into bringing it to the Capitol
and wants me to use it to unlock a mystical portal . . . possibly in a room called SBB13.
Not exactly a clear picture.
As they pressed on, Langdon tried to shake from his mind the horrible image of Peter’s tattooed hand,
transformed into the Hand of the Mysteries. The gruesome picture was accompanied by Peter’s voice: The
Ancient Mysteries, Robert, have spawned many myths . . . but that does not mean they themselves are fiction.
Despite a career studying mystical symbols and history, Langdon had always struggled intellectually with the
idea of the Ancient Mysteries and their potent promise of apotheosis.
Admittedly, the historical record contained indisputable evidence that secret wisdom had been passed down
through the ages, apparently having come out of the Mystery Schools in early Egypt. This knowledge moved
underground, resurfacing in Renaissance Europe, where, according to most accounts, it was entrusted to an
elite group of scientists within the walls of Europe’s premier scientific think tank—the Royal Society of
London—enigmatically nicknamed the Invisible College.
This concealed “college” quickly became a brain trust of the world’s most enlightened minds—those of Isaac
Newton, Francis Bacon, Robert Boyle, and even Benjamin Franklin. Today, the list of modern “fellows” was
no less impressive—Einstein, Hawking, Bohr, and Celsius. These great minds had all made quantum leaps in
human understanding, advances that, according to some, were the result of their exposure to ancient wisdom
hidden within the Invisible College. Langdon doubted this was true, although certainly there had been an
unusual amount of “mystical work” taking place within those walls.
The discovery of Isaac Newton’s secret papers in 1936 had stunned the world by revealing Newton’s allconsuming
passion for the study of ancient alchemy and mystical wisdom. Newton’s private papers included
a handwritten letter to Robert Boyle in which he exhorted Boyle to keep “high silence” regarding the
mystical knowledge they had learned. “It cannot be communicated,” Newton wrote, “without immense
damage to the world.”
The meaning of this strange warning was still being debated today.
“Professor,” Sato said suddenly, glancing up from her BlackBerry, “despite your insistence that you have no
idea why you’re here tonight, perhaps you could shed light on the meaning of Peter Solomon’s ring.”
“I can try,” Langdon said, refocusing.
She produced the specimen bag and handed it to Langdon. “Tell me about the symbols on his ring.”
Langdon examined the familiar ring as they moved through the deserted passageway. Its face bore the image
of a double-headed phoenix holding a banner proclaiming ORDO AB CHAO, and its chest was emblazoned
with the number 33. “The double-headed phoenix with the number thirty-three is the emblem of the highest
Masonic degree.” Technically, this prestigious degree existed solely within the Scottish Rite. Nonetheless,
the rites and degrees of Masonry were a complex hierarchy that Langdon had no desire to detail for Sato
tonight. “Essentially, the thirty-third degree is an elite honor reserved for a small group of highly
accomplished Masons. All the other degrees can be attained by successful completion of the previous degree,
but ascension to the thirty-third degree is controlled. It’s by invitation only.”
“So you were aware that Peter Solomon was a member of this elite inner circle?”
“Of course. Membership is hardly a secret.”
“And he is their highest-ranking official?”
“Currently, yes. Peter heads the Supreme Council Thirty-third Degree, which is the governing body of the
Scottish Rite in America.” Langdon always loved visiting their headquarters—the House of the Temple—a
classical masterpiece whose symbolic ornamentation rivaled that of Scotland’s Rosslyn Chapel.
“Professor, did you notice the engraving on the ring’s band? It bears the words ‘All is revealed at the thirtythird
degree.’ ”
Langdon nodded. “It’s a common theme in Masonic lore.”
“Meaning, I assume, that if a Mason is admitted to this highest thirty-third degree, then something special is
revealed to him?”
“Yes, that’s the lore, but probably not the reality. There’s always been conspiratorial conjecture that a select
few within this highest echelon of Masonry are made privy to some great mystical secret. The truth, I
suspect, is probably far less dramatic.”
Peter Solomon often made playful allusions to the existence of a precious Masonic secret, but Langdon
always assumed it was just a mischievous attempt to coax him into joining the brotherhood. Unfortunately,
tonight’s events had been anything but playful, and there had been nothing mischievous about the seriousness
with which Peter had urged Langdon to protect the sealed package in his daybag.
Langdon glanced forlornly at the plastic bag containing Peter’s gold ring. “Director,” he asked, “would you
mind if I held on to this?”
She looked over. “Why?”
“It’s very valuable to Peter, and I’d like to return it to him tonight.”
She looked skeptical. “Let’s hope you get that chance.”
“Thanks.” Langdon pocketed the ring.
“Another question,” Sato said as they hastened deeper into the labyrinth. “My staff said that while crosschecking
the concepts of the ‘thirty-third degree’ and ‘portal’ with Masonry, they turned up literally
hundreds of references to a ‘pyramid’?”
“That’s not surprising, either,” Langdon said. “The pyramid builders of Egypt are the forerunners of the
modern stonemasons, and the pyramid, along with Egyptian themes, is very common in Masonic
symbolism.”
“Symbolizing what?”
“The pyramid essentially represents enlightenment. It’s an architectural symbol emblematic of ancient man’s
ability to break free from his earthly plane and ascend upward toward heaven, toward the golden sun, and
ultimately, toward the supreme source of illumination.”
She waited a moment. “Nothing else?”
Nothing else?! Langdon had just described one of history’s most elegant symbols. The structure through
which man elevated himself into the realm of the gods.
“According to my staff,” she said, “it sounds like there is a much more relevant connection tonight. They tell
me there exists a popular legend about a specific pyramid here in Washington—a pyramid that relates
specifically to the Masons and the Ancient Mysteries?”
Langdon now realized what she was referring to, and he tried to dispel the notion before they wasted any
more time. “I am familiar with the legend, Director, but it’s pure fantasy. The Masonic Pyramid is one of
D.C.’s most enduring myths, probably stemming from the pyramid on the Great Seal of the United States.”
“Why didn’t you mention it earlier?”
Langdon shrugged. “Because it has no basis in fact. Like I said, it’s a myth. One of many associated with the
Masons.”
“And yet this particular myth relates directly to the Ancient Mysteries?”
“Sure, as do plenty of others. The Ancient Mysteries are the foundation for countless legends that have
survived in history—stories about powerful wisdom protected by secret guardians like the Templars, the
Rosicrucians, the Illuminati, the Alumbrados—the list goes on and on. They are all based on the Ancient
Mysteries . . . and the Masonic Pyramid is just one example.”
“I see,” Sato said. “And what does this legend actually say?”
Langdon considered it for a few steps and then replied, “Well, I’m no specialist in conspiracy theory, but I
am educated in mythology, and most accounts go something like this: The Ancient Mysteries—the lost
wisdom of the ages—have long been considered mankind’s most sacred treasure, and like all great treasures,
they have been carefully protected. The enlightened sages who understood the true power of this wisdom
learned to fear its awesome potential. They knew that if this secret knowledge were to fall into uninitiated
hands, the results could be devastating; as we said earlier, powerful tools can be used either for good or for
evil. So, in order to protect the Ancient Mysteries, and mankind in the process, the early practitioners formed
secret fraternities. Inside these brotherhoods, they shared their wisdom only with the properly initiated,
passing the wisdom from sage to sage. Many believe we can look back and see the historical remnants of
those who mastered the Mysteries . . . in the stories of sorcerers, magicians, and healers.”
“And the Masonic Pyramid?” Sato asked. “How does that fit in?”
“Well,” Langdon said, striding faster now to keep pace, “this is where history and myth begin to merge.
According to some accounts, by the sixteenth century in Europe, almost all of these secret fraternities had
become extinct, most of them exterminated by a growing tide of religious persecution. The Freemasons, it is
said, became the last surviving custodians of the Ancient Mysteries. Understandably, they feared that if their
own brotherhood one day died off like its predecessors, the Ancient Mysteries would be lost for all time.”
“And the pyramid?” Sato again pressed.
Langdon was getting to it. “The legend of the Masonic Pyramid is quite simple. It states that the Masons, in
order to fulfill their responsibility of protecting this great wisdom for future generations, decided to hide it in
a great fortress.” Langdon tried to gather his recollections of the story. “Again, I stress this is all myth, but
allegedly, the Masons transported their secret wisdom from the Old World to the New World—here, to
America—a land they hoped would remain free from religious tyranny. And here they built an impenetrable
fortress—a hidden pyramid—designed to protect the Ancient Mysteries until the time that all of mankind
was ready to handle the awesome power that this wisdom could communicate. According to the myth, the
Masons crowned their great pyramid with a shining, solid-gold capstone as symbol of the precious treasure
within—the ancient wisdom capable of empowering mankind to his full human potential. Apotheosis.”
“Quite a story,” Sato said.
“Yes. The Masons fall victim to all kinds of crazy legends.”
“Obviously you don’t believe such a pyramid exists.”
“Of course not,” Langdon replied. “There’s no evidence whatsoever to suggest that our Masonic forefathers
built any kind of pyramid in America, much less in D.C. It’s pretty difficult to hide a pyramid, especially one
large enough to hold all the lost wisdom of the ages.”
The legend, as Langdon recalled, never explained exactly what was supposed to be inside the Masonic
Pyramid—whether it was ancient texts, occult writings, scientific revelations, or something far more
mysterious—but the legend did say that the precious information inside was ingeniously encoded . . . and
understandable only to the most enlightened souls.
“Anyway,” Langdon said, “this story falls into a category we symbologists call an ‘archetypal hybrid’—a
blend of other classic legends, borrowing so many elements from popular mythology that it could only be a
fictional construct . . . not historical fact.”
When Langdon taught his students about archetypal hybrids, he used the example of fairy tales, which were
recounted across generations and exaggerated over time, borrowing so heavily from one another that they
evolved into homogenized morality tales with the same iconic elements—virginal damsels, handsome
princes, impenetrable fortresses, and powerful wizards. By way of fairy tales, this primeval battle of “good
vs. evil” is ingrained into us as children through our stories: Merlin vs. Morgan le Fay, Saint George vs. the
Dragon, David vs. Goliath, Snow White vs. the Witch, and even Luke Skywalker battling Darth Vader.
Sato scratched her head as they turned a corner and followed Anderson down a short flight of stairs. “Tell me
this. If I’m not mistaken, pyramids were once considered mystical portals through which the deceased
pharaohs could ascend to the gods, were they not?”
“True.”
Sato stopped short and caught Langdon’s arm, glaring up at him with an expression somewhere between
surprise and disbelief. “You’re saying Peter Solomon’s captor told you to find a hidden portal, and it didn’t
occur to you that he was talking about the Masonic Pyramid from this legend?”
“By any name, the Masonic Pyramid is a fairy tale. It’s purely fantasy.”
Sato stepped closer to him now, and Langdon could smell her cigarette breath. “I understand your position on
that, Professor, but for the sake of my investigation, the parallel is hard to ignore. A portal leading to secret
knowledge? To my ear, this sounds a lot like what Peter Solomon’s captor claims you, alone, can unlock.”
“Well, I can hardly believe—”
“What you believe is not the point. No matter what you believe, you must concede that this man might
himself believe that the Masonic Pyramid is real.”
“The man’s a lunatic! He may well believe that SBB Thirteen is the entrance to a giant underground pyramid
that contains all the lost wisdom of the ancients!”
Sato stood perfectly still, her eyes seething. “The crisis I am facing tonight is not a fairy tale, Professor. It is
quite real, I assure you.”
A cold silence hung between them.
“Ma’am?” Anderson finally said, gesturing to another secure door ten feet away. “We’re almost there, if
you’d like to continue.” Sato finally broke eye contact with Langdon, motioning for Anderson to move on.
They followed the security chief through the secure doorway, which deposited them in a narrow passage.
Langdon looked left and then right.
You’ve got to be kidding.
He was standing in the longest hallway he had ever seen.
CHAPTER 31
Trish Dunne felt the familiar surge of adrenaline as she exited the bright lights of the Cube and moved into
the raw darkness of the void. The SMSC’s front gate had just called to say that Katherine’s guest, Dr.
Abaddon, had arrived and required an escort back to Pod 5. Trish had offered to bring him back, mostly out
of curiosity. Katherine had said very little about the man who would be visiting them, and Trish was
intrigued. The man was apparently someone Peter Solomon trusted deeply; the Solomons never invited
anyone back to the Cube. This was a first.
I hope he handles the crossing okay, Trish thought as she moved through the frigid darkness. The last thing
she needed was Katherine’s VIP panicking when he realized what he had to do to get to the lab. The first time
is always the worst.
Trish’s first time had been about a year ago. She had accepted Katherine’s job offer, signed a nondisclosure,
and then come to the SMSC with Katherine to see the lab. The two women had walked the length of “The
Street,” arriving at a metal door marked POD 5. Even though Katherine had tried to prepare her by
describing the lab’s remote location, Trish was not ready for what she saw when the pod door hissed open.
The void.
Katherine stepped over the threshold, walked a few feet into the perfect blackness, and then motioned for
Trish to follow. “Trust me. You won’t get lost.”
Trish pictured herself wandering in a pitch-black, stadium-size room and broke a sweat at the mere thought.
“We have a guidance system to keep you on track.” Katherine pointed to the floor. “Very low-tech.”
Trish squinted through the darkness at the rough cement floor. It took a moment to see it in the darkness, but
there was a narrow carpet runner that had been laid down in a straight line. The carpet ran like a roadway,
disappearing into the darkness.
“See with your feet,” Katherine said, turning and walking off. “Just follow right behind me.”
As Katherine disappeared into the blackness, Trish swallowed her fear and followed. This is insane! She had
taken only a few steps down the carpet when the Pod 5 door swung shut behind her, snuffing out the last faint
hint of light. Pulse racing, Trish turned all of her attention to the feeling of the carpet beneath her feet. She
had ventured only a handful of steps down the soft runner when she felt the side of her right foot hit hard
cement. Startled, she instinctively corrected to the left, getting both feet back on soft carpet.
Katherine’s voice materialized up ahead in the blackness, her words almost entirely swallowed by the lifeless
acoustics of this abyss. “The human body is amazing,” she said. “If you deprive it of one sensory input, the
other senses take over, almost instantly. Right now, the nerves in your feet are literally ‘tuning’ themselves to
become more sensitive.”
Good thing, Trish thought, correcting course again.
They walked in silence for what seemed entirely too long. “How much farther?” Trish finally asked.
“We’re about halfway.” Katherine’s voice sounded more distant now.
Trish sped up, doing her best to stay composed, but the breadth of the darkness felt like it would engulf her. I
can’t see one millimeter in front of my face! “Katherine? How do you know when to stop walking?”
“You’ll know in a moment,” Katherine said.
That was a year ago, and now, tonight, Trish was once again in the void, heading in the opposite direction,
out to the lobby to retrieve her boss’s guest. A sudden change in carpet texture beneath her feet alerted her
that she was three yards from the exit. The warning track, as it was called by Peter Solomon, an avid baseball
fan. Trish stopped short, pulled out her key card, and groped in the darkness along the wall until she found
the raised slot and inserted her card.
The door hissed open.
Trish squinted into the welcoming light of the SMSC hallway.
Made it . . . again.
Moving through the deserted corridors, Trish found herself thinking about the bizarre redacted file they had
found on a secure network. Ancient portal? Secret location underground? She wondered if Mark Zoubianis
was having any luck figuring out where the mysterious document was located.
Inside the control room, Katherine stood in the soft glow of the plasma wall and gazed up at the enigmatic
document they had uncovered. She had isolated her key phrases now and felt increasingly certain that the
document was talking about the same far-flung legend that her brother had apparently shared with Dr.
Abaddon.
. . . secret location UNDERGROUND where the . . .
. . . somewhere in WASHINGTON, D.C., the coordinates . . .
. . . uncovered an ANCIENT PORTAL that led . . .
. . . warning the PYRAMID holds dangerous . . .
. . . decipher this ENGRAVED SYMBOLON to unveil . . .
I need to see the rest of the file, Katherine thought.
She stared a moment longer and then flipped the plasma wall’s power switch. Katherine always turned off
this energy-intensive display so as not to waste the fuel cell’s liquid hydrogen reserves.
She watched as her keywords slowly faded, collapsing down into a tiny white dot, which hovered in the
middle of the wall and then finally twinkled out.
She turned and walked back toward her office. Dr. Abaddon would be arriving momentarily, and she wanted
to make him feel welcome.
CHAPTER 32
“Almost there,” Anderson said, guiding Langdon and Sato down the seemingly endless corridor that ran the
entire length of the Capitol’s eastern foundation. “In Lincoln’s day, this passage had a dirt floor and was
filled with rats.”
Langdon felt grateful the floor had been tiled; he was not a big fan of rats. The group continued on, their
footfalls drumming up an eerie, uneven echo in the long passageway. Doorways lined the long hallway, some
closed but many ajar. Many of the rooms down on this level looked abandoned. Langdon noticed the
numbers on the doors were now descending and, after a while, seemed to be running out.
SB4 . . . SB3 . . . SB2 . . . SB1 . . .
They continued past an unmarked door, but Anderson stopped short when the numbers began ascending
again.
HB1 . . . HB2 . . .
“Sorry,” Anderson said. “Missed it. I almost never come down this deep.”
The group backed up a few yards to an old metal door, which Langdon now realized was located at the
hallway’s central point—the meridian that divided the Senate Basement (SB) and the House Basement (HB).
As it turned out, the door was indeed marked, but its engraving was so faded, it was almost imperceptible.
SBB
“Here we are,” Anderson said. “Keys will be arriving any moment.”
Sato frowned and checked her watch.
Langdon eyed the SBB marking and asked Anderson, “Why is this space associated with the Senate side
even though it’s in the middle?”
Anderson looked puzzled. “What do you mean?”
“It says SBB, which begins with an S, not an H.”
Anderson shook his head. “The S in SBB doesn’t stand for Senate. It—”
“Chief?” a guard called out in the distance. He came jogging up the hallway toward them, holding out a key.
“Sorry, sir, it took a few minutes. We couldn’t locate the main SBB key. This is a spare from an auxiliary
box.”
“The original is missing?” Anderson said, sounding surprised.
“Probably lost,” the guard replied, arriving out of breath. “Nobody has requested access down here for ages.”
Anderson took the key. “No secondary key for SBB Thirteen?”
“Sorry, so far we’re not finding keys for any of the rooms in the SBB. MacDonald’s on it now.” The guard
pulled out his radio and spoke into it. “Bob? I’m with the chief. Any additional info yet on the key for SBB
Thirteen?”
The guard’s radio crackled, and a voice replied, “Actually, yeah. It’s strange. I’m seeing no entries since we
computerized, but the hard logs indicate all the storage rooms in the SBB were cleaned out and abandoned
more than twenty years ago. They’re now listed as unused space.” He paused. “All except for SBB Thirteen.”
Anderson grabbed the radio. “This is the chief. What do you mean, all except SBB Thirteen?”
“Well, sir,” the voice replied, “I’ve got a handwritten notation here that designates SBB Thirteen as ‘private.’
It was a long time ago, but it’s written and initialed by the Architect himself.”
The term Architect, Langdon knew, was not a reference to the man who had designed the Capitol, but rather
to the man who ran it. Similar to a building manager, the man appointed as Architect of the Capitol was in
charge of everything including maintenance, restoration, security, hiring personnel, and assigning offices.
“The strange thing . . .” the voice on the radio said, “is that the Architect’s notation indicates that this ‘private
space’ was set aside for the use of Peter Solomon.”
Langdon, Sato, and Anderson all exchanged startled looks.
“I’m guessing, sir,” the voice continued, “that Mr. Solomon has our primary key to the SBB as well as any
keys to SBB Thirteen.”
Langdon could not believe his ears. Peter has a private room in the basement of the Capitol? He had always
known Peter Solomon had secrets, but this was surprising even to Langdon.
“Okay,” Anderson said, clearly unamused. “We’re hoping to get access to SBB Thirteen specifically, so keep
looking for a secondary key.”
“Will do, sir. We’re also working on the digital image that you requested—”
“Thank you,” Anderson interrupted, pressing the talk button and cutting him off. “That will be all. Send that
file to Director Sato’s BlackBerry as soon as you have it.”
“Understood, sir.” The radio went silent.
Anderson handed the radio back to the guard in front of them.
The guard pulled out a photocopy of a blueprint and handed it to his chief. “Sir, the SBB is in gray, and
we’ve notated with an X which room is SBB Thirteen, so it shouldn’t be hard to find. The area is quite
small.”
Anderson thanked the guard and turned his focus to the blueprint as the young man hurried off. Langdon
looked on, surprised to see the astonishing number of cubicles that made up the bizarre maze beneath the
U.S. Capitol.
Anderson studied the blueprint for a moment, nodded, and then stuffed it into his pocket. Turning to the door
marked SBB, he raised the key, but hesitated, looking uneasy about opening it. Langdon felt similar
misgivings; he had no idea what was behind this door, but he was quite certain that whatever Solomon had
hidden down here, he wanted to keep private. Very private.
Sato cleared her throat, and Anderson got the message. The chief took a deep breath, inserted the key, and
tried to turn it. The key didn’t move. For a split second, Langdon felt hopeful the key was wrong. On the
second try, though, the lock turned, and Anderson heaved the door open.
As the heavy door creaked outward, damp air rushed out into the corridor.
Langdon peered into the darkness but could see nothing at all.
“Professor,” Anderson said, glancing back at Langdon as he groped blindly for a light switch. “To answer
your question, the S in SBB doesn’t stand for Senate. It stands for sub.”
“Sub?” Langdon asked, puzzled.
Anderson nodded and flicked the switch just inside the door. A single bulb illuminated an alarmingly steep
staircase descending into inky blackness. “SBB is the Capitol’s subbasement.”
CHAPTER 33
Systems security specialist Mark Zoubianis was sinking deeper into his futon and scowling at the
information on his laptop screen.
What the hell kind of address is this?
His best hacking tools were entirely ineffective at breaking into the document or at unmasking Trish’s
mysterious IP address. Ten minutes had passed, and Zoubianis’s program was still pounding away in vain at
the network firewalls. They showed little hope of penetration. No wonder they’re overpaying me. He was
about to retool and try a different approach when his phone rang.
Trish, for Christ’s sake, I said I’d call you. He muted the football game and answered. “Yeah?”
“Is this Mark Zoubianis?” a man asked. “At 357 Kingston Drive in Washington?”
Zoubianis could hear other muffled conversations in the background. A telemarketer during the play-offs?
Are they insane? “Let me guess, I won a week in Anguilla?”
“No,” the voice replied with no trace of humor. “This is systems security for the Central Intelligence Agency.
We would like to know why you are attempting to hack one of our classified databases?”
Three stories above the Capitol Building’s subbasement, in the wide-open spaces of the visitor center,
security guard Nuñez locked the main entry doors as he did every night at this time. As he headed back
across the expansive marble floors, he thought of the man in the army-surplus jacket with the tattoos.
I let him in. Nuñez wondered if he would have a job tomorrow.
As he headed toward the escalator, a sudden pounding on the outside doors caused him to turn. He squinted
back toward the main entrance and saw an elderly African American man outside, rapping on the glass with
his open palm and motioning to be let in.
Nuñez shook his head and pointed to his watch.
The man pounded again and stepped into the light. He was immaculately dressed in a blue suit and had closecropped
graying hair. Nuñez’s pulse quickened. Holy shit. Even at a distance, Nuñez now recognized who
this man was. He hurried back to the entrance and unlocked the door. “I’m sorry, sir. Please, please come in.”
Warren Bellamy—Architect of the Capitol—stepped across the threshold and thanked Nuñez with a polite
nod. Bellamy was lithe and slender, with an erect posture and piercing gaze that exuded the confidence of a
man in full control of his surroundings. For the last twenty-five years, Bellamy had served as the supervisor
of the U.S. Capitol.
“May I help you, sir?” Nuñez asked.
“Thank you, yes.” Bellamy enunciated his words with crisp precision. As a northeastern Ivy League
graduate, his diction was so exacting he sounded almost British. “I’ve just learned that you had an incident
here this evening.” He looked deeply concerned.
“Yes, sir. It was—”
“Where’s Chief Anderson?”
“Downstairs with Director Sato from the CIA’s Office of Security.”
Bellamy’s eyes widened with concern. “The CIA is here?”
“Yes, sir. Director Sato arrived almost immediately after the incident.”
“Why?” Bellamy demanded.
Nuñez shrugged. As if I was going to ask?
Bellamy strode directly toward the escalators. “Where are they?”
“They just went to the lower levels.” Nuñez hastened after him.
Bellamy glanced back with a look of concern. “Downstairs? Why?” “I don’t really know—I just heard it on
my radio.”
Bellamy was moving faster now. “Take me to them right away.”
“Yes, sir.”
As the two men hurried across the open expanse, Nuñez caught a glimpse of a large golden ring on
Bellamy’s finger.
Nuñez pulled out his radio. “I’ll alert the chief that you’re coming down.”
“No.” Bellamy’s eyes flashed dangerously. “I’d prefer to be unannounced.”
Nuñez had made some big mistakes tonight, but failing to alert Chief Anderson that the Architect was now in
the building would be his last. “Sir?” he said, uneasy. “I think Chief Anderson would prefer—”
“You are aware that I employ Mr. Anderson?” Bellamy said.
Nuñez nodded.
“Then I think he would prefer you obey my wishes.”
CHAPTER 34
Trish Dunne entered the SMSC lobby and looked up with surprise. The guest waiting here looked nothing
like the usual bookish, flannel-clad doctors who entered this building—those of anthropology, oceanography,
geology, and other scientific fields. Quite to the contrary, Dr. Abaddon looked almost aristocratic in his
impeccably tailored suit. He was tall, with a broad torso, well-tanned face, and perfectly combed blond hair
that gave Trish the impression he was more accustomed to luxuries than to laboratories.
“Dr. Abaddon, I presume?” Trish said, extending her hand.
The man looked uncertain, but he took Trish’s plump hand in his broad palm. “I’m sorry. And you are?”
“Trish Dunne,” she replied. “I’m Katherine’s assistant. She asked me to escort you back to her lab.”
“Oh, I see.” The man smiled now. “Very nice to meet you, Trish. My apologies if I seemed confused. I was
under the impression Katherine was here alone this evening.” He motioned down the hall. “But I’m all yours.
Lead the way.”
Despite the man’s quick recovery, Trish had seen the flash of disappointment in his eyes. She now suspected
the motive for Katherine’s secrecy earlier about Dr. Abaddon. A budding romance, maybe? Katherine never
discussed her social life, but her visitor was attractive and well-groomed, and although younger than
Katherine, he clearly came from her world of wealth and privilege. Nonetheless, whatever Dr. Abaddon had
imagined tonight’s visit might entail, Trish’s presence did not seem to be part of his plan.
At the lobby’s security checkpoint, a lone guard quickly pulled off his headphones, and Trish could hear the
Redskins game blaring. The guard put Dr. Abaddon through the usual visitor routine of metal detectors and
temporary security badges.
“Who’s winning?” Dr. Abaddon said affably as he emptied his pockets of a cell phone, some keys, and a
cigarette lighter.
“Skins by three,” the guard said, sounding eager to get back. “Helluva game.”
“Mr. Solomon will be arriving shortly,” Trish told the guard. “Would you please send him back to the lab
once he arrives?”
“Will do.” The guard gave an appreciative wink as they passed through. “Thanks for the heads-up. I’ll look
busy.”
Trish’s comment had been not only for the benefit of the guard but also to remind Dr. Abaddon that Trish
was not the only one intruding on his private evening here with Katherine.
“So how do you know Katherine?” Trish asked, glancing up at the mysterious guest.
Dr. Abaddon chuckled. “Oh, it’s a long story. We’ve been working on something together.”
Understood, Trish thought. None of my business.
“This is an amazing facility,” Abaddon said, glancing around as they moved down the massive corridor.
“I’ve never actually been here.”
His airy tone was becoming more genial with every step, and Trish noticed he was actively taking it all in. In
the bright lights of the hallway, she also noticed that his face looked like he had a fake tan. Odd. Nonetheless,
as they navigated the deserted corridors, Trish gave him a general synopsis of the SMSC’s purpose and
function, including the various pods and their contents.
The visitor looked impressed. “Sounds like this place has a treasure trove of priceless artifacts. I would have
expected guards posted everywhere.”
“No need,” Trish said, motioning to the row of fish-eye lenses lining the ceiling high above. “Security here is
automated. Every inch of this corridor is recorded twenty-four/seven, and this corridor is the spine of the
facility. It’s impossible to access any of the rooms off this corridor without a key card and PIN number.”
“Efficient use of cameras.”
“Knock on wood, we’ve never had a theft. Then again, this is not the kind of museum anyone would rob—
there’s not much call on the black market for extinct flowers, Inuit kayaks, or giant squid carcasses.”
Dr. Abaddon chuckled. “I suppose you’re right.”
“Our biggest security threat is rodents and insects.” Trish explained how the building prevented insect
infestations by freezing all SMSC refuse and also by an architectural feature called a “dead zone”—an
inhospitable compartment between double walls, which surrounded the entire building like a sheath.
“Incredible,” Abaddon said. “So, where is Katherine and Peter’s lab?”
“Pod Five,” Trish said. “It’s all the way at the end of this hallway.”
Abaddon halted suddenly, spinning to his right, toward a small window. “My word! Will you look at that!”
Trish laughed. “Yeah, that’s Pod Three. They call it Wet Pod.”
“Wet?” Abaddon said, face pressed to the glass.
“There are over three thousand gallons of liquid ethanol in there. Remember the giant squid carcass I
mentioned earlier?”
“That’s the squid?!” Dr. Abaddon turned from the window momentarily, his eyes wide. “It’s huge!”
“A female Architeuthis,” Trish said. “She’s over forty feet.”
Dr. Abaddon, apparently enraptured by the sight of the squid, seemed unable to pull his eyes away from the
glass. For a moment, the grown man reminded Trish of a little boy at a pet-store window, wishing he could
go in and see a puppy. Five seconds later, he was still staring longingly through the window.
“Okay, okay,” Trish finally said, laughing as she inserted her key card and typed her PIN number. “Come on.
I’ll show you the squid.”
As Mal’akh stepped into the dimly lit world of Pod 3, he scanned the walls for security cameras. Katherine’s
pudgy little assistant began rattling on about the specimens in this room. Mal’akh tuned her out. He had no
interest whatsoever in giant squids. His only interest was in using this dark, private space to solve an
unexpected problem.
CHAPTER 35
The wooden stairs descending to the Capitol’s subbasement were as steep and shallow as any stairs Langdon
had ever traversed. His breathing was faster now, and his lungs felt tight. The air down here was cold and
damp, and Langdon couldn’t help but flash on a similar set of stairs he had taken a few years back into the
Vatican’s Necropolis. The City of the Dead.
Ahead of him, Anderson led the way with his flashlight. Behind Langdon, Sato followed closely, her tiny
hands occasionally pressing into Langdon’s back. I’m going as fast as I can. Langdon inhaled deeply, trying
to ignore the cramped walls on either side of him. There was barely room for his shoulders on this staircase,
and his daybag now scraped down the sidewall.
“Maybe you should leave your bag above,” Sato offered behind him.
“I’m fine,” Langdon replied, having no intention of letting it out of his sight. He pictured Peter’s little
package and could not begin to imagine how it might relate to anything in the subbasement of the U.S.
Capitol.
“Just a few more steps,” Anderson said. “Almost there.”
The group had descended into darkness, moving beyond the reach of the staircase’s lone lightbulb. When
Langdon stepped off the final wooden tread, he could feel that the floor beneath his feet was dirt. Journey to
the center of the Earth. Sato stepped down behind him.
Anderson now raised his beam, examining their surroundings. The subbasement was less of a basement than
it was an ultranarrow corridor that ran perpendicular to the stairs. Anderson shone his light left and then
right, and Langdon could see the passage was only about fifty feet long and lined on both sides with small
wooden doors. The doors abutted one another so closely that the rooms behind them could not have been
more than ten feet wide.
ACME Storage meets the Catacombs of Domatilla, Langdon thought as Anderson consulted the blueprint.
The tiny section depicting the subbasement was marked with an X to show the location of SBB13. Langdon
couldn’t help but notice that the layout was identical to a fourteen-tomb mausoleum—seven vaults facing
seven vaults—with one removed to accommodate the stairs they had just descended. Thirteen in all.
He suspected America’s “thirteen” conspiracy theorists would have a field day if they knew there were
exactly thirteen storage rooms buried beneath the U.S. Capitol. Some found it suspicious that the Great Seal
of the United States had thirteen stars, thirteen arrows, thirteen pyramid steps, thirteen shield stripes, thirteen
olive leaves, thirteen olives, thirteen letters in annuit coeptis, thirteen letters in e pluribus unum, and on and
on.
“It does look abandoned,” Anderson said, shining the beam into the chamber directly in front of them. The
heavy wooden door was wide open. The shaft of light illuminated a narrow stone chamber—about ten feet
wide by some thirty feet deep—like a dead-end hallway to nowhere. The chamber contained nothing more
than a couple of old collapsed wooden boxes and some crumpled packing paper.
Anderson shone his light on a copper plate mounted on the door. The plate was covered with verdigris, but
the old marking was legible:
SBB IV
“SBB Four,” Anderson said.
“Which one is SBB Thirteen?” Sato asked, faint wisps of steam curling out of her mouth in the cold
subterranean air.
Anderson turned the beam toward the south end of the corridor. “Down there.”
Langdon peered down the narrow passage and shivered, feeling a light sweat despite the cold.
As they moved through the phalanx of doorways, all of the rooms looked the same, doors ajar, apparently
abandoned long ago. When they reached the end of the line, Anderson turned to his right, raising the beam to
peer into room SBB13. The flashlight beam, however, was impeded by a heavy wooden door.
Unlike the others, the door to SBB13 was closed.
This final door looked exactly like the others—heavy hinges, iron handle, and a copper number plate
encrusted with green. The seven characters on the number plate were the same characters on Peter’s palm
upstairs.
SBB XIII
Please tell me the door is locked, Langdon thought.
Sato spoke without hesitation. “Try the door.”
The police chief looked uneasy, but he reached out, grasped the heavy iron handle, and pushed down on it.
The handle didn’t budge. He shone the light now, illuminating a heavy, old-fashioned lock plate and keyhole.
“Try the master key,” Sato said.
Anderson produced the main key from the entry door upstairs, but it was not even close to fitting.
“Am I mistaken,” Sato said, her tone sarcastic, “or shouldn’t Security have access to every corner of a
building in case of emergency?”
Anderson exhaled and looked back at Sato. “Ma’am, my men are checking for a secondary key, but—”
“Shoot the lock,” she said, nodding toward the key plate beneath the lever.
Langdon’s pulse leaped.
Anderson cleared his throat, sounding uneasy. “Ma’am, I’m waiting for news on a secondary key. I am not
sure I’m comfortable blasting our way into—”
“Perhaps you’d be more comfortable in prison for obstructing a CIA investigation?”
Anderson looked incredulous. After a long beat, he reluctantly handed the light to Sato and unsnapped his
holster.
“Wait!” Langdon said, no longer able to stand idly by. “Think about it. Peter gave up his right hand rather
than reveal whatever might be behind this door. Are you sure we want to do this? Unlocking this door is
essentially complying with the demands of a terrorist.”
“Do you want to get Peter Solomon back?” Sato asked.
“Of course, but—”
“Then I suggest you do exactly what his captor is requesting.”
“Unlock an ancient portal? You think this is the portal?”
Sato shone the light in Langdon’s face. “Professor, I have no idea what the hell this is. Whether it’s a storage
unit or the secret entrance to an ancient pyramid, I intend to open it. Do I make myself clear?”
Langdon squinted into the light and finally nodded.
Sato lowered the beam and redirected it at the door’s antique key plate. “Chief? Go ahead.”
Still looking averse to the plan, Anderson extracted his sidearm very, very slowly, gazing down at it with
uncertainty.
“Oh, for God’s sake!” Sato’s tiny hands shot out, and she grabbed the weapon from him. She stuffed the
flashlight into his now empty palm. “Shine the damned light.” She handled the gun with the confidence of
someone who had trained with weapons, wasting no time turning off the pistol’s safety, cocking the weapon,
and aiming at the lock.
“Wait!” Langdon yelled, but he was too late.
The gun roared three times.
Langdon’s eardrums felt like they had exploded. Is she insane?! The gunshots in the tiny space had been
deafening.
Anderson also looked shaken, his hand wavering a bit as he shone the flashlight on the bullet-riddled door.
The lock mechanism was now in tatters, the wood surrounding it entirely pulverized. The lock had released,
the door now having fallen ajar.
Sato extended the pistol and pressed the tip of the barrel against the door, giving it a push. The door swung
fully into the blackness beyond.
Langdon peered in but could see nothing in the darkness. What in the world is that smell? An unusual, fetid
odor wafted out of the darkness.
Anderson stepped into the doorway and shone the light on the floor, tracing carefully down the length of the
barren dirt floor. This room was like the others—a long, narrow space. The sidewalls were rugged stone,
giving the room the feel of an ancient prison cell. But that smell . . .
“There’s nothing here,” Anderson said, moving the beam farther down the chamber floor. Finally, as the
beam reached the end of the floor, he raised it up to illuminate the chamber’s farthest wall.
“My God . . . !” Anderson shouted.
Everyone saw it and jumped back.
Langdon stared in disbelief at the deepest recess of the chamber.
To his horror, something was staring back.
CHAPTER 36
“What in God’s name . . . ?” At the threshold of SBB13, Anderson fumbled with his light and retreated a
step.
Langdon also recoiled, as did Sato, who looked startled for the first time all night.
Sato aimed the gun at the back wall and motioned for Anderson to shine the light again. Anderson raised the
light. The beam was dim by the time it reached the far wall, but the light was enough to illuminate the shape
of a pallid and ghostly face, staring back at them through lifeless sockets.
A human skull.
The skull sat atop a rickety wooden desk positioned against the rear wall of the chamber. Two human leg
bones sat beside the skull, along with a collection of other items that were meticulously arranged on the desk
in shrinelike fashion—an antique hourglass, a crystal flask, a candle, two saucers of pale powder, and a sheet
of paper. Propped against the wall beside the desk stood the fearsome shape of a long scythe, its curved blade
as familiar as that of the grim reaper.
Sato stepped into the room. “Well, now . . . it appears Peter Solomon keeps more secrets than I imagined.”
Anderson nodded, inching after her. “Talk about skeletons in your closet.” He raised the light and surveyed
the rest of the empty chamber. “And that smell?” he added, crinkling his nose. “What is it?”
“Sulfur,” Langdon replied evenly behind them. “There should be two saucers on the desk. The saucer on the
right will contain salt. And the other sulfur.”
Sato wheeled in disbelief. “How the hell would you know that?!”
“Because, ma’am, there are rooms exactly like this all over the world.”
One story above the subbasement, Capitol security guard Nuñez escorted the Architect of the Capitol,
Warren Bellamy, down the long hallway that ran the length of the eastern basement. Nuñez could have sworn
that he had just heard three gunshots down here, muffled and underground.
There’s no way.
“Subbasement door is open,” Bellamy said, squinting down the hallway at a door that stood ajar in the
distance.
Strange evening indeed, Nuñez thought. Nobody goes down there. “I’ll be glad to find out what’s going on,”
he said, reaching for his radio.
“Go back to your duties,” Bellamy said. “I’m fine from here.”
Nuñez shifted uneasily. “You sure?”
Warren Bellamy stopped, placing a firm hand on Nuñez’s shoulder. “Son, I’ve worked here for twenty-five
years. I think I can find my way.”
CHAPTER 37
Mal’akh had seen some eerie spaces in his life, but few rivaled the unearthly world of Pod 3. Wet Pod. The
massive room looked as if a mad scientist had taken over a Walmart and packed every aisle and shelf with
specimen jars of all shapes and sizes. Lit like a photographic darkroom, the space was bathed in a reddish
haze of “safelight” that emanated from beneath the shelves, filtering upward and illuminating the ethanolfilled
containers. The clinical smell of preservative chemicals was nauseating.
“This pod houses over twenty thousand species,” the chubby girl was saying. “Fish, rodents, mammals,
reptiles.”
“All dead, I hope?” Mal’akh asked, making a show of sounding nervous.
The girl laughed. “Yes, yes. All very much dead. I’ll admit, I didn’t dare come in for at least six months after
I started work.”
Mal’akh could understand why. Everywhere he looked there were specimen jars of dead life-forms—
salamanders, jellyfish, rats, bugs, birds, and other things he could not begin to identify. As if this collection
were not unsettling enough on its own, the hazy red safelights that protected these photosensitive specimens
from long-term light exposure gave the visitor the feeling he was standing inside a giant aquarium, where
lifeless creatures were somehow congregating to watch from the shadows.
“That’s a coelacanth,” the girl said, pointing to a big Plexiglas container that held the ugliest fish Mal’akh
had ever seen. “They were thought to be extinct with the dinosaurs, but this was caught off Africa a few
years back and donated to the Smithsonian.”
Lucky you, Mal’akh thought, barely listening. He was busy scanning the walls for security cameras. He saw
only one—trained on the entry door—not surprising, considering that entrance was probably the only way in.
“And here is what you wanted to see . . .” she said, leading him to the giant tank he had seen from the
window. “Our longest specimen.” She swept her arm out over the vile creature like a game-show host
displaying a new car. “Architeuthis.”
The squid tank looked like a series of glass phone booths had been laid on their sides and fused end to end.
Within the long, clear Plexiglas coffin hovered a sickeningly pale and amorphous shape. Mal’akh gazed
down at the bulbous, saclike head and its basketball-size eyes. “Almost makes your coelacanth look
handsome,” he said.
“Wait till you see her lit.”
Trish flipped back the long lid of the tank. Ethanol fumes wafted out as she reached down into the tank and
flipped a switch just above the liquid line. A string of fluorescent lights flickered to life along the entire base
of the tank. Architeuthis was now shining in all her glory—a colossal head attached to a slithery mass of
decaying tentacles and razor-sharp suckers.
She began talking about how Architeuthis could beat a sperm whale in a fight.
Mal’akh heard only empty prattling.
The time had come.
Trish Dunne always felt a bit uneasy in Pod 3, but the chill that had just run through her felt different.
Visceral. Primal.
She tried to ignore it, but it grew quickly now, clawing deeply at her. Although Trish could not seem to place
the source of her anxiety, her gut was clearly telling her it was time to leave.
“Anyhow, that’s the squid,” she said, reaching into the tank and turning off the display light. “We should
probably get back to Katherine’s—”
A broad palm clamped hard over her mouth, yanking her head back. Instantly, a powerful arm was wrapped
around her torso, pinning her against a rock-hard chest. For a split second, Trish went numb with shock.
Then came the terror.
The man groped across her chest, grabbing her key card and yanking down hard. The cord burned the back of
her neck before snapping. The key card fell on the floor at their feet. She fought, trying to twist away, but she
was no match for the man’s size and strength. She tried to scream, but his hand remained tightly across her
mouth. He leaned down and placed his mouth next to her ear, whispering, “When I take my hand off your
mouth, you will not scream, is that clear?”
She nodded vigorously, her lungs burning for air. I can’t breathe!
The man removed his hand from her mouth, and Trish gasped, inhaling deeply.
“Let me go!” she demanded, breathless. “What the hell are you doing?”
“Tell me your PIN number,” the man said.
Trish felt totally at a loss. Katherine! Help! Who is this man?! “Security can see you!” she said, knowing full
well they were out of range of the cameras. And nobody is watching anyway.
“Your PIN number,” the man repeated. “The one that matches your key card.”
An icy fear churned in her gut, and Trish spun violently, wriggling an arm free and twisting around, clawing
at the man’s eyes. Her fingers hit flesh and raked down one cheek. Four dark gashes opened on his flesh
where she scratched him. Then she realized the dark stripes on his flesh were not blood. The man was
wearing makeup, which she had just scratched off, revealing dark tattoos hidden underneath.
Who is this monster?!
With seemingly superhuman strength, the man spun her around and hoisted her up, pushing her out over the
open squid tank, her face now over the ethanol. The fumes burned her nostrils.
“What is your PIN number?” he repeated.
Her eyes burned, and she could see the pale flesh of the squid submerged beneath her face.
“Tell me,” he said, pushing her face closer to the surface. “What is it?”
Her throat was burning now. “Zero-eight-zero-four!” she blurted, barely able to breathe. “Let me go! Zeroeight-
zero-four!”
“If you’re lying,” he said, pushing down farther, her hair in the ethanol now.
“I’m not lying!” she said, coughing. “August 4! It’s my birthday!”
“Thank you, Trish.”
His powerful hands clasped her head tighter, and a crushing force rammed her downward, plunging her face
into the tank. Searing pain burned her eyes. The man pressed down harder, driving her whole head under the
ethanol. Trish felt her face pressing into the fleshy head of the squid.
Summoning all of her strength, she bucked violently, arching backward, trying to pull her head out of the
tank. But the powerful hands did not budge.
I have to breathe!
She remained submerged, straining not to open her eyes or mouth. Her lungs burned as she fought the
powerful urge to breathe in. No! Don’t! But Trish’s inhalation reflex finally took over.
Her mouth flew open, and her lungs expanded violently, attempting to suck in the oxygen that her body
craved. In a searing rush, a wave of ethanol poured into her mouth. As the chemicals gushed down her throat
into her lungs, Trish felt a pain like nothing she had ever imagined possible. Mercifully, it lasted only a few
seconds before her world went black.
Mal’akh stood beside the tank, catching his breath and surveying the damage.
The lifeless woman lay slumped over the rim of the tank, her face still submerged in ethanol. Seeing her
there, Mal’akh flashed on the only other woman he had ever killed.
Isabel Solomon.
Long ago. Another life.
Mal’akh gazed down now at the woman’s flaccid corpse. He grabbed her ample hips and lifted with his legs,
hoisting her up, pushing forward, until she began to slide over the rim of the squid tank. Trish Dunne
slithered headfirst down into the ethanol. The rest of her body followed, sloshing down. Gradually, the
ripples subsided, leaving the woman hovering limp over the huge sea creature. As her clothing got heavier,
she began to sink, slipping into the darkness. Bit by bit, Trish Dunne’s body settled on top of the great beast.
Mal’akh wiped his hands and replaced the Plexiglas lid, sealing the tank.
Wet Pod has a new specimen.
He retrieved Trish’s key card from the floor and slipped it in his pocket: 0804.
When Mal’akh had first seen Trish in the lobby, he’d seen a liability. Then he’d realized her key card and
password were his insurance. If Katherine’s data-storage room was as secure as Peter had implied, then
Mal’akh was anticipating some challenges persuading Katherine to unlock it for him. I now have my own set
of keys. He was pleased to know he would no longer have to waste time bending Katherine to his will.
As Mal’akh stood up straight, he saw his own reflection in the window and could tell his makeup was badly
mangled. It didn’t matter anymore. By the time Katherine put it all together, it would be too late.
CHAPTER 38
“This room is Masonic?” Sato demanded, turning from the skull and staring at Langdon in the darkness.
Langdon nodded calmly. “It’s called a Chamber of Reflection. These rooms are designed as cold, austere
places in which a Mason can reflect on his own mortality. By meditating on the inevitability of death, a
Mason gains a valuable perspective on the fleeting nature of life.”
Sato looked around the eerie space, apparently not convinced. “This is some kind of meditation room?”
“Essentially, yes. These chambers always incorporate the same symbols—skull and crossed bones, scythe,
hourglass, sulfur, salt, blank paper, a candle, et cetera. The symbols of death inspire Masons to ponder how
better to lead their lives while on this earth.”
“It looks like a death shrine,” Anderson said.
That’s kind of the point. “Most of my symbology students have the same reaction at first.” Langdon often
assigned them Symbols of Freemasonry by Beresniak, which contained beautiful photos of Chambers of
Reflection.
“And your students,” Sato demanded, “don’t find it unnerving that Masons meditate with skulls and
scythes?”
“No more unnerving than Christians praying at the feet of a man nailed to a cross, or Hindus chanting in
front of a four-armed elephant named Ganesh. Misunderstanding a culture’s symbols is a common root of
prejudice.”
Sato turned away, apparently in no mood for a lecture. She moved toward the table of artifacts. Anderson
tried to light her way with the flashlight, but the beam was beginning to dim. He tapped the heel of the light
and coaxed it to burn a little brighter.
As the threesome moved deeper into the narrow space, the pungent tang of sulfur filled Langdon’s nostrils.
The subbasement was damp, and the humidity in the air was activating the sulfur in the bowl. Sato arrived at
the table and stared down at the skull and accompanying objects.
Anderson joined her, doing his best to light the desk with the weakening beam of his flashlight.
Sato examined everything on the table and then placed her hands on her hips, sighing. “What is all this
junk?”
The artifacts in this room, Langdon knew, were carefully selected and arranged. “Symbols of
transformation,” he told her, feeling confined as he inched forward and joined them at the table. “The skull,
or caput mortuum, represents man’s final transformation through decay; it’s a reminder that we all shed our
mortal flesh one day. The sulfur and salt are alchemical catalysts that facilitate transformation. The hourglass
represents the transformational power of time.” He motioned to the unlit candle. “And this candle represents
the formative primordial fire and the awakening of man from his ignorant slumber—transformation through
illumination.”
“And . . . that?” Sato asked, pointing into the corner.
Anderson swung his dimming flashlight beam to the giant scythe that leaned against the back wall.
“Not a death symbol, as most assume,” Langdon said. “The scythe is actually a symbol of the transformative
nourishment of nature—the reaping of nature’s gifts.”
Sato and Anderson fell silent, apparently trying to process their bizarre surroundings.
Langdon wanted nothing more than to get out of the place. “I realize this room may seem unusual,” he told
them, “but there’s nothing to see here; it’s really quite normal. A lot of Masonic lodges have chambers
exactly like this one.”
“But this is not a Masonic lodge!”Anderson declared. “It’s the U.S. Capitol, and I’d like to know what the
hell this room is doing in my building.”
“Sometimes Masons set aside rooms like this in their offices or private homes as meditation spaces. It is not
uncommon.” Langdon knew a heart surgeon in Boston who had converted a closet in his office into a
Masonic Chamber of Reflection so he could ponder mortality before going into surgery.
Sato looked troubled. “You’re saying Peter Solomon comes down here to reflect on death?”
“I really don’t know,” Langdon said sincerely. “Maybe he created it as a sanctuary for his Masonic brothers
who work in the building, giving them a spiritual sanctuary away from the chaos of the material world . . . a
place for a powerful lawmaker to reflect before making decisions that affect his fellow man.”
“Lovely sentiment,” Sato said, her tone sarcastic, “but I have a feeling Americans might have a problem with
their leaders praying in closets with scythes and skulls.”
Well, they shouldn’t, Langdon thought, imagining how different a world it might be if more leaders took time
to ponder the finality of death before racing off to war.
Sato pursed her lips and carefully surveyed all four corners of the candle lit chamber. “There must be
something in here besides human bones and bowls of chemicals, Professor. Someone transported you all the
way from your home in Cambridge to be in this precise room.”
Langdon clutched his daybag to his side, still unable to imagine how the package he carried might relate to
this chamber. “Ma’am, I’m sorry, but I don’t see anything out of the ordinary here.” Langdon hoped that now
at last they could get to the business of trying to find Peter.
Anderson’s light flickered again, and Sato spun on him, her temper starting to show. “For Christ’s sake, is it
too much to ask?” She plunged her hand into her pocket and yanked out a cigarette lighter. Striking her
thumb on the flint, she held out the flame and lit the desk’s lone candle. The wick sputtered and then caught,
spreading a ghostly luminescence throughout the constricted space. Long shadows raked the stone walls. As
the flame grew brighter, an unexpected sight materialized before them.
“Look!” Anderson said, pointing.
In the candlelight, they could now see a faded patch of graffiti—seven capital letters scrawled across the rear
wall.
VITRIOL
“An odd choice of word,” Sato said as the candlelight cast a frightening skull-shaped silhouette across the
letters.
“Actually, it’s an acronym,” Langdon said. “It’s written on the rear wall of most chambers like this as a
shorthand for the Masonic meditative mantra: Visita interiora terrae, rectificando invenies occultum
lapidem.”
Sato eyed him, looking almost impressed. “Meaning?”
“Visit the interior of the earth, and by rectifying, you will find the hidden stone.”
Sato’s gaze sharpened. “Does the hidden stone have any connection to a hidden pyramid?”
Langdon shrugged, not wanting to encourage the comparison. “Those who enjoy fantasizing about hidden
pyramids in Washington would tell you that occultum lapidem refers to the stone pyramid, yes. Others will
tell you it’s a reference to the Philosopher’s Stone—a substance alchemists believed could bring them
everlasting life or turn lead into gold. Others claim it’s a reference to the Holy of Holies, a hidden stone
chamber at the core of the Great Temple. Some say it’s a Christian reference to the hidden teachings of Saint
Peter—the Rock. Every esoteric tradition interprets ‘the stone’ in its own way, but invariably the occultum
lapidem is a source of power and enlightenment.”
Anderson cleared his throat. “Is it possible Solomon lied to this guy? Maybe he told him there was something
down here . . . and there really isn’t.”
Langdon was having similar thoughts.
Without warning, the candle flame flickered, as if caught by a draft. It dimmed for a moment and then
recovered, burning brightly again.
“That’s odd,” Anderson said. “I hope no one closed the door upstairs.” He strode out of the chamber into the
darkness of the hallway. “Hello?”
Langdon barely noticed him leave. His gaze had been drawn suddenly to the rear wall. What just happened?
“Did you see that?” Sato asked, also staring with alarm at the wall.
Langdon nodded, his pulse quickening. What did I just see?
A moment earlier, the rear wall seemed to have shimmered, as if a ripple of energy had passed through it.
Anderson now strode back into the room. “No one’s out there.” As he entered, the wall shimmered again.
“Holy shit!” he exclaimed, jumping back.
All three stood mute for a long moment, staring in unison at the back wall. Langdon felt another chill run
through him as he realized what they were seeing. He reached out tentatively, until his fingertips touched the
rear surface of the chamber. “It’s not a wall,” he said.
Anderson and Sato stepped closer, peering intently.
“It’s a canvas,” Langdon said.
“But it billowed,” Sato said quickly.
Yes, in a very strange way. Langdon examined the surface more closely. The sheen on the canvas had
refracted the candlelight in a startling manner because the canvas had just billowed away from the room . . .
fluttering backward through the plane of the rear wall.
Langdon extended his outstretched fingers very gently, pressing the canvas backward. Startled, he yanked his
hand back. There’s an opening!
“Pull it aside,” Sato ordered.
Langdon’s heart pounded wildly now. He reached up and clutched the edge of the canvas banner, slowly
pulling the fabric to one side. He stared in disbelief at what lay hidden behind it. My God.
Sato and Anderson stood in stunned silence as they looked through the opening in the rear wall.
Finally, Sato spoke. “It appears we’ve just found our pyramid.”
CHAPTER 39
Robert Langdon stared at the opening in the rear wall of the chamber. Hidden behind the canvas banner, a
perfectly square hole had been hollowed out of the wall. The opening, about three feet across, appeared to
have been created by removing a series of bricks. For a moment, in the darkness, Langdon thought the hole
was a window to a room beyond.
Now he saw it was not.
The opening extended only a few feet into the wall before terminating. Like a rough-hewn cubbyhole, the
recessed niche reminded Langdon of a museum alcove designed to hold a statuette. Fittingly, this niche
displayed one small object.
About nine inches tall, it was a piece of carved, solid granite. The surface was elegant and smooth with four
polished sides that shone in the candlelight.
Langdon could not fathom what it was doing here. A stone pyramid?
“From your look of surprise,” Sato said, sounding self-satisfied, “I take it this object is not typical within a
Chamber of Reflection?”
Langdon shook his head.
“Then perhaps you would like to reassess your previous claims regarding the legend of a Masonic Pyramid
hidden in Washington?” Her tone now was almost smug.
“Director,” Langdon replied instantly, “this little pyramid is not the Masonic Pyramid.”
“So it is merely coincidence that we found a pyramid hidden at the heart of the U.S. Capitol in a secret
chamber belonging to a Masonic leader?”
Langdon rubbed his eyes and tried to think clearly. “Ma’am, this pyramid doesn’t resemble the myth in any
way. The Masonic Pyramid is described as enormous, with a tip forged of solid gold.”
Moreover, Langdon knew, this little pyramid—with its flat top—was not even a true pyramid. Without its
tip, this was another symbol entirely. Known as an Unfinished Pyramid, it was a symbolic reminder that
man’s ascent to his full human potential was always a work in progress. Though few realized it, this symbol
was the most widely published symbol on earth. Over twenty billion in print. Adorning every one-dollar bill
in circulation, the Unfinished Pyramid waited patiently for its shining capstone, which hovered above it as a
reminder of America’s yet-unfulfilled destiny and the work yet to be done, both as a country and as
individuals.
“Lift it down,” Sato said to Anderson, motioning to the pyramid. “I want a closer look.” She began making
room on the desk by shoving the skull and crossed bones to one side with no reverence whatsoever.
Langdon was starting to feel like they were common grave robbers, desecrating a personal shrine.
Anderson maneuvered past Langdon, reached into the niche, and clamped his large palms on either side of
the pyramid. Then, barely able to lift at this awkward angle, he slid the pyramid toward him and lowered it
with a hard thud onto the wooden desk. He stepped back to give Sato room.
The director repositioned the candle close to the pyramid and studied its polished surface. Slowly, she ran her
tiny fingers over it, examining every inch of the flat top, and then the sides. She wrapped her hands around to
feel the back, then frowned in apparent disappointment. “Professor, earlier you said the Masonic Pyramid
was constructed to protect secret information.”
“That’s the legend, yes.”
“So, hypothetically speaking, if Peter’s captor believed this was the Masonic Pyramid, he would believe it
contained powerful information.”
Langdon nodded, exasperated. “Yes, although even if he found this information, he probably would not be
able to read it. According to legend, the contents of the pyramid are encoded, making them indecipherable . .
. except to the most worthy.”
“I beg your pardon?”
Despite Langdon’s growing impatience, he replied with an even tone. “Mythological treasures are always
protected by tests of worthiness. As you may recall, in the legend of the Sword in the Stone, the stone refuses
to give up the sword except to Arthur, who was spiritually prepared to wield the sword’s awesome power.
The Masonic Pyramid is based on the same idea. In this case, the information is the treasure, and it is said to
be written in an encoded language—a mystical tongue of lost words—legible only to the worthy.”
A faint smile crossed Sato’s lips. “That may explain why you were summoned here tonight.”
“I’m sorry?”
Calmly, Sato rotated the pyramid in place, turning it a full 180 degrees. The pyramid’s fourth side now shone
in the candlelight.
Robert Langdon stared at it with surprise.
“It appears,” Sato said, “that someone believes you’re worthy.”
CHAPTER 40
What’s taking Trish so long?
Katherine Solomon checked her watch again. She’d forgotten to warn Dr. Abaddon about the bizarre
commute to her lab, but she couldn’t imagine the darkness had slowed them down this much. They should
have arrived by now.
Katherine walked over to the exit and heaved open the lead-lined door, staring out into the void. She listened
for a moment, but heard nothing.
“Trish?” she called out, her voice swallowed by the darkness.
Silence.
Puzzled, she closed the door, took out her cell phone, and called the lobby. “This is Katherine. Is Trish out
there?”
“No, ma’am,” the lobby guard said. “She and your guest headed back about ten minutes ago.”
“Really? I don’t think they’re even inside Pod Five yet.”
“Hold on. I’ll check.” Katherine could hear the guard’s fingers clicking on his computer keyboard. “You’re
right. According to Ms. Dunne’s key-card logs, she has not yet opened the Pod Five door. Her last access
event was about eight minutes ago . . . at Pod Three. I guess she’s giving your guest a little tour on his way
in.”
Katherine frowned. Apparently. The news was a bit odd, but at least she knew Trish wouldn’t be long in Pod
3. The smell in there is terrible. “Thanks. Has my brother arrived yet?”
“No, ma’am, not yet.”
“Thank you.”
As Katherine hung up, she felt an unexpected twinge of trepidation. The uneasy feeling made her pause, but
only for a moment. It was the same exact disquiet she’d felt earlier when she stepped into Dr. Abaddon’s
house. Embarrassingly, her feminine intuition had failed her there. Badly.
It’s nothing, Katherine told herself.
CHAPTER 41
Robert Langdon studied the stone pyramid. This isn’t possible.
“An ancient encoded language,” Sato said without looking up. “Tell me, does this qualify?”
On the newly exposed face of the pyramid, a series of sixteen characters was precisely engraved into the
smooth stone.
Beside Langdon, Anderson’s mouth now gaped open, mirroring Langdon’s own shock. The security chief
looked like he had just seen some kind of alien keypad.
“Professor?” Sato said. “I assume you can read this?”
Langdon turned. “Why would you assume that?”
“Because you were brought here, Professor. You were chosen. This inscription appears to be a code of some
sort, and considering your reputation, it seems obvious to me that you were brought here to decipher it.”
Langdon had to admit that after his experiences in Rome and Paris, he’d received a steady flow of requests
asking for his help deciphering some of history’s great unsolved codes—the Phaistos Disk, the Dorabella
Cipher, the mysterious Voynich Manuscript.
Sato ran her finger over the inscription. “Can you tell me the meaning of these icons?”
They’re not icons, Langdon thought. They’re symbols. The language was one he had recognized
immediately—an encrypted cipher language from the seventeenth century. Langdon knew very well how to
break it. “Ma’am,” he said, feeling hesitant, “this pyramid is Peter’s private property.”
“Private or not, if this code is indeed the reason you were brought to Washington, I am not giving you a
choice in the matter. I want to know what it says.”
Sato’s BlackBerry pinged loudly, and she yanked the device from her pocket, studying the incoming message
for several moments. Langdon was amazed that the Capitol Building’s internal wireless network provided
service this far down.
Sato grunted and raised her eyebrows, giving Langdon an odd look.
“Chief Anderson?” she said, turning to him. “A word in private, if I may?” The director motioned for
Anderson to join her, and they disappeared into the pitch-black hallway, leaving Langdon alone in the
flickering candlelight of Peter’s Chamber of Reflection.
Chief Anderson wondered when this night would end. A severed hand in my Rotunda? A death shrine in my
basement? Bizarre engravings on a stone pyramid? Somehow, the Redskins game no longer felt significant.
As he followed Sato into the darkness of the hall, Anderson flicked on his flashlight. The beam was weak but
better than nothing. Sato led him down the hall a few yards, out of sight of Langdon.
“Have a look at this,” she whispered, handing Anderson her BlackBerry.
Anderson took the device and squinted at the illuminated screen. It displayed a black-and-white image—the
X-ray of Langdon’s bag that Anderson had requested be sent to Sato. As in all X-rays, the objects of greatest
density appeared in the brightest white. In Langdon’s bag, a lone item outshone everything else. Obviously
extremely dense, the object glowed like a dazzling jewel in a murky jumble of other items. Its shape was
unmistakable.
He’s been carrying that all night? Anderson looked over at Sato in surprise. “Why didn’t Langdon mention
this?”
“Damned good question,” Sato whispered.
“The shape . . . it can’t be coincidence.”
“No,” Sato said, her tone angry now. “I would say not.”
A faint rustle in the corridor drew Anderson’s attention. Startled, he pointed his flashlight down the black
passageway. The dying beam revealed only a deserted corridor, lined with open doors.
“Hello?” Anderson said. “Is somebody there?”
Silence.
Sato gave him an odd look, apparently having heard nothing.
Anderson listened a moment longer and then shook it off. I’ve got to get out of here.
Alone in the candlelit chamber, Langdon ran his fingers over the sharply carved edges of the pyramid’s
engraving. He was curious to know what the message said, and yet he was not about to intrude on Peter
Solomon’s privacy any more than they already had. And why would this lunatic care about this small
pyramid anyway?
“We have a problem, Professor,” Sato’s voice declared loudly behind him. “I’ve just received a new piece of
information, and I’ve had enough of your lies.”
Langdon turned to see the OS director marching in, BlackBerry in hand and fire in her eyes. Taken aback,
Langdon looked to Anderson for help, but the chief was now standing guard at the door, his expression
unsympathetic. Sato arrived in front of Langdon and thrust her BlackBerry in his face.
Bewildered, Langdon looked at the screen, which displayed an inverted black-and-white photograph, like a
ghostly film negative. The photo looked like a jumble of objects, and one of them shone very brightly.
Though askew and off center, the brightest object was clearly a little, pointed pyramid.
A tiny pyramid? Langdon looked at Sato. “What is this?”
The question seemed only to incense Sato further. “You’re pretending you don’t know?”
Langdon’s temper flared. “I’m not pretending anything! I’ve never seen this before in my life!”
“Bullshit!” Sato snapped, her voice cutting through the musty air. “You’ve been carrying it in your bag all
night!”
“I—” Langdon stalled midsentence. His eyes moved slowly down to the daybag on his shoulder. Then he
raised them again to the BlackBerry. My God . . . the package. He looked more closely at the image. Now he
saw it. A ghostly cube, enclosing the pyramid. Stunned, Langdon realized he was looking at an X-ray of his
bag . . . and also of Peter’s mysterious cube-shaped package. The cube was, in fact, a hollow box . . . a small
pyramid.
Langdon opened his mouth to speak, but his words failed him. He felt the breath go out of his lungs as a new
revelation struck him.
Simple. Pure. Devastating.
My God. He looked back at the truncated stone pyramid on the desk. Its apex was flat—a small square area—
a blank space symbolically awaiting its final piece . . . that piece which would transform it from an
Unfinished Pyramid into a True Pyramid.
Langdon now realized the tiny pyramid he was carrying was not a pyramid at all. It’s a capstone. At that
instant, he knew why he alone could unlock the mysteries of this pyramid.
I hold the final piece.
And it is indeed . . . a talisman.
When Peter had told Langdon the package contained a talisman, Langdon had laughed. Now he realized his
friend was right. This tiny capstone was a talisman, but not the magic kind . . . the far older kind. Long before
talisman had magical connotations, it had another meaning—“completion.” From the Greek telesma,
meaning “complete,” a talisman was any object or idea that completed another and made it whole. The
finishing element. A capstone, symbolically speaking, was the ultimate talisman, transforming the Unfinished
Pyramid into a symbol of completed perfection.
Langdon now felt an eerie convergence that forced him to accept one very strange truth: with the exception
of its size, the stone pyramid in Peter’s Chamber of Reflection seemed to be transforming itself, bit by bit,
into something vaguely resembling the Masonic Pyramid of legend.
From the brightness with which the capstone shone on the X-ray, Langdon suspected it was made of metal . .
. a very dense metal. Whether or not it was solid gold, he had no way of knowing, and he was not about to let
his mind start playing tricks on him. This pyramid is too small. The code’s too easy to read. And . . . it’s a
myth, for heaven’s sake!
Sato was watching him. “For a bright man, Professor, you’ve made some dumb choices tonight. Lying to an
intelligence director? Intentionally obstructing a CIA investigation?”
“I can explain, if you’ll let me.”
“You will be explaining at CIA headquarters. As of this moment, I am detaining you.”
Langdon’s body went rigid. “You can’t possibly be serious.”
“Deadly serious. I made it very clear to you that the stakes tonight were high, and you chose not to cooperate.
I strongly suggest you start thinking about explaining the inscription on this pyramid, because when we
arrive at the CIA . . .” She raised her BlackBerry and took a close-up snapshot of the engraving on the stone
pyramid. “My analysts will have had a head start.”
Langdon opened his mouth to protest, but Sato was already turning to Anderson at the door. “Chief,” she
said, “put the stone pyramid in Langdon’s bag and carry it. I’ll handle taking Mr. Langdon into custody.
Your weapon, if I may?”
Anderson was stone-faced as he advanced into the chamber, unsnapping his shoulder holster as he came. He
gave his gun to Sato, who immediately aimed it at Langdon.
Langdon watched as if in a dream. This cannot be happening.
Anderson now came to Langdon and removed the daybag from his shoulder, carrying it over to the desk and
setting it on the chair. He unzipped the bag, propped it open, and then hoisted the heavy stone pyramid off
the desk and into the bag, along with Langdon’s notes and the tiny package.
Suddenly there was a rustle of movement in the hallway. A dark outline of a man materialized in the
doorway, rushing into the chamber and approaching fast behind Anderson. The chief never saw him coming.
In an instant, the stranger had lowered his shoulder and crashed into Anderson’s back. The chief launched
forward, his head cracking into the edge of the stone niche. He fell hard, crumpling on the desk, sending
bones and artifacts flying. The hourglass shattered on the floor. The candle toppled to the floor, still burning.
Sato reeled amid the chaos, raising the gun, but the intruder grabbed a femur and lashed out with it, striking
her shoulder with the leg bone. Sato let out a cry of pain and fell back, dropping the weapon. The newcomer
kicked the gun away and then wheeled toward Langdon. The man was tall and slender, an elegant African
American whom Langdon had never seen before in his life.
“Grab the pyramid!” the man commanded. “Follow me!”
CHAPTER 42
The African American man leading Langdon through the Capitol’s subterranean maze was clearly someone
of power. Beyond knowing his way through all the side corridors and back rooms, the elegant stranger
carried a key ring that seemed to unlock every door that blocked their way.
Langdon followed, quickly running up an unfamiliar staircase. As they climbed, he felt the leather strap of
his daybag cutting hard into his shoulder. The stone pyramid was so heavy that Langdon feared the bag’s
strap might break.
The past few minutes defied all logic, and now Langdon found himself moving on instinct alone. His gut told
him to trust this stranger. Beyond saving Langdon from Sato’s arrest, the man had taken dangerous action to
protect Peter Solomon’s mysterious pyramid. Whatever the pyramid may be. While his motivation remained
a mystery, Langdon had glimpsed a telltale shimmer of gold on the man’s hand—a Masonic ring—the
double-headed phoenix and the number 33. This man and Peter Solomon were more than trusted friends.
They were Masonic brothers of the highest degree.
Langdon followed him to the top of the stairs, into another corridor, and then through an unmarked door into
a utilitarian hallway. They ran past supply boxes and bags of garbage, veering off suddenly through a service
door that deposited them in an utterly unexpected world—a plush movie theater of some sort. The older man
led the way up the side aisle and out the main doors into the light of a large atrium. Langdon now realized
they were in the visitor center through which he had entered earlier tonight.
Unfortunately, so was a Capitol police officer.
As they came face-to-face with the officer, all three men stopped, staring at one another. Langdon recognized
the young Hispanic officer from the X-ray machine earlier tonight.
“Officer Nuñez,” the African American man said. “Not a word. Follow me.”
The guard looked uneasy but obeyed without question.
Who is this guy?
The three of them hurried toward the southeast corner of the visitor center, where they arrived at a small
foyer and a set of heavy doors blocked with orange pylons. The doors were sealed with masking tape,
apparently to keep the dust of whatever was happening beyond out of the visitor center. The man reached up
and peeled off the tape on the door. Then he flipped through his key ring as he spoke to the guard. “Our
friend Chief Anderson is in the subbasement. He may be injured. You’ll want to check on him.”
“Yes, sir.” Nuñez looked as baffled as he did alarmed.
“Most important, you did not see us.” The man found a key, took it off the key ring, and used it to turn the
heavy dead bolt. He pulled open the steel door and tossed the key to the guard. “Lock this door behind us.
Put the tape back on as best as you can. Pocket the key and say nothing. To anyone. Including the chief. Is
that clear, Officer Nuñez?”
The guard eyed the key as if he’d just been entrusted with a precious gem. “It is, sir.”
The man hurried through the door, and Langdon followed. The guard locked the heavy bolt behind them, and
Langdon could hear him re-applying the masking tape.
“Professor Langdon,” the man said as they strode briskly down a modern-looking corridor that was obviously
under construction. “My name is Warren Bellamy. Peter Solomon is a dear friend of mine.”
Langdon shot a startled glance at the stately man. You’re Warren Bellamy? Langdon had never met the
Architect of the Capitol, but he certainly knew the man’s name.
“Peter speaks very highly of you,” Bellamy said, “and I’m sorry we are meeting under these dreadful
circumstances.”
“Peter is in terrible trouble. His hand . . .”
“I know.” Bellamy sounded grim. “That’s not the half of it, I’m afraid.”
They reached the end of the lit section of corridor, and the passageway took an abrupt left. The remaining
length of corridor, wherever it went, was pitch-black.
“Hold on,” Bellamy said, disappearing into a nearby electrical room from which a tangle of heavy-duty
orange extension cords snaked out, running away from them into the darkness of the corridor. Langdon
waited while Bellamy rooted around inside. The Architect must have located the switch that sent power to
the extension cords, because suddenly the route before them became illuminated.
Langdon could only stare.
Washington, D.C.—like Rome—was a city laced with secret passageways and underground tunnels. The
passage before them now reminded Langdon of the passetto tunnel connecting the Vatican to Castel
Sant’Angelo. Long. Dark. Narrow. Unlike the ancient passetto, however, this passage was modern and not
yet complete. It was a slender construction zone that was so long it seemed to narrow to nothing at its distant
end. The only lighting was a string of intermittent construction bulbs that did little more than accentuate the
tunnel’s impossible length.
Bellamy was already heading down the passage. “Follow me. Watch your step.”
Langdon felt himself fall into step behind Bellamy, wondering where on earth this tunnel led.
At that moment, Mal’akh stepped out of Pod 3 and strode briskly down the deserted main corridor of the
SMSC toward Pod 5. He clutched Trish’s key card in his hand and quietly whispered, “Zero-eight-zerofour.”
Something else was cycling through his mind as well. Mal’akh had just received an urgent message from the
Capitol Building. My contact has run into unforeseen difficulties. Even so, the news remained encouraging:
Robert Langdon now possessed both the pyramid and the capstone. Despite the unexpected way in which it
had happened, the crucial pieces were falling into place. It was almost as if destiny itself were guiding
tonight’s events, ensuring Mal’akh’s victory.
CHAPTER 43
Langdon hurried to keep pace with Warren Bellamy’s brisk footsteps as they moved without a word down
the long tunnel. So far, the Architect of the Capitol appeared far more intent on putting distance between Sato
and this stone pyramid than he did on explaining to Langdon what was going on. Langdon had a growing
apprehension that there was far more going on than he could imagine.
The CIA? The Architect of the Capitol? Two Thirty-third-degree Masons?
The shrill sound of Langdon’s cell phone cut the air. He pulled his phone from his jacket. Uncertain, he
answered. “Hello?” The voice that spoke was an eerie, familiar whisper. “Professor, I hear you had
unexpected company.”
Langdon felt an icy chill. “Where the hell is Peter?!” he demanded, his words reverberating in the enclosed
tunnel. Beside him, Warren Bellamy glanced over, looking concerned and motioning for Langdon to keep
walking.
“Don’t worry,” the voice said. “As I told you, Peter is somewhere safe.”
“You cut off his hand, for God’s sake! He needs a doctor!”
“He needs a priest,” the man replied. “But you can save him. If you do as I command, Peter will live. I give
you my word.”
“The word of a madman means nothing to me.”
“Madman? Professor, surely you appreciate the reverence with which I have adhered to the ancient protocols
tonight. The Hand of the Mysteries guided you to a portal—the pyramid that promises to unveil ancient
wisdom. I know you now possess it.”
“You think this is the Masonic Pyramid?” Langdon demanded. “It’s a chunk of rock.”
There was silence on the other end of the line. “Mr. Langdon, you’re too smart to play dumb. You know very
well what you’ve uncovered tonight. A stone pyramid . . . hidden at the core of Washington, D.C. . . . by a
powerful Mason?”
“You’re chasing a myth! Whatever Peter told you, he told you in fear.
The Legend of the Masonic Pyramid is fiction. The Masons never built any pyramid to protect secret
wisdom. And even if they did, this pyramid is far too small to be what you think it is.”
The man chuckled. “I see Peter has told you very little. Nonetheless, Mr. Langdon, whether or not you
choose to accept what it is you now possess, you will do as I say. I am well aware that the pyramid you are
carrying has an encrypted engraving. You will decipher that engraving for me. Then, and only then, will I
return Peter Solomon to you.”
“Whatever you believe this engraving reveals,” Langdon said, “it won’t be the Ancient Mysteries.”
“Of course not,” he replied. “The mysteries are far too vast to be written on the side of a little stone
pyramid.”
The response caught Langdon off guard. “But if this engraving is not the Ancient Mysteries, then this
pyramid is not the Masonic Pyramid. Legend clearly states the Masonic Pyramid was constructed to protect
the Ancient Mysteries.”
The man’s tone was condescending now. “Mr. Langdon, the Masonic Pyramid was constructed to preserve
the Ancient Mysteries, but with a twist you’ve apparently not yet grasped. Did Peter never tell you? The
power of the Masonic Pyramid is not that it reveals the mysteries themselves . . . but rather that it reveals the
secret location where the mysteries are buried.”
Langdon did a double take.
“Decipher the engraving,” the voice continued, “and it will tell you the hiding place of mankind’s greatest
treasure.” He laughed. “Peter did not entrust you with the treasure itself, Professor.”
Langdon came to an abrupt halt in the tunnel. “Hold on. You’re saying this pyramid is . . . a map?
” Bellamy jolted to a stop now, too, his expression one of shock and alarm. Clearly, the caller had just hit a
raw nerve. The pyramid is a map.
“This map,” the voice whispered, “or pyramid, or portal, or whatever you choose to call it . . . was created
long ago to ensure the hiding place of the Ancient Mysteries would never be forgotten . . . that it would never
be lost to history.”
“A grid of sixteen symbols doesn’t look much like a map.”
“Appearances can be deceiving, Professor. But regardless, you alone have the power to read that inscription.”
“You’re wrong,” Langdon fired back, picturing the simplistic cipher. “Anyone could decipher this engraving.
It’s not very sophisticated.”
“I suspect there is more to the pyramid than meets the eye. Regardless, you alone possess the capstone.”
Langdon pictured the little capstone in his bag. Order from chaos? He didn’t know what to believe anymore,
but the stone pyramid in his bag seemed to be getting heavier with every passing moment.
Mal’akh pressed the cell phone to his ear, enjoying the sound of Langdon’s anxious breathing on the other
end. “Right now, I have business to attend to, Professor, and so do you. Call me as soon as you have
deciphered the map. We will go together to the hiding place and make our trade. Peter’s life . . . for all the
wisdom of the ages.”
“I will do nothing,” Langdon declared. “Especially not without proof Peter is alive.”
“I suggest you not test me. You are a very small cog in a vast machine. If you disobey me, or attempt to find
me, Peter will die. This I swear.”
“For all I know, Peter is already dead.”
“He is very much alive, Professor, but he desperately needs your help.”
“What are you really looking for?” Langdon shouted into the phone.
Mal’akh paused before answering. “Many people have pursued the Ancient Mysteries and debated their
power. Tonight, I will prove the mysteries are real.”
Langdon was silent.
“I suggest you get to work on the map immediately,” Mal’akh said. “I need this information today.”
“Today?! It’s already after nine o’clock!”
“Exactly. Tempus fugit.”
CHAPTER 44
New York editor Jonas Faukman was just turning off the lights in his Manhattan office when his phone rang.
He had no intention of picking up at this hour—that is, until he glimpsed the caller-ID display. This ought to
be good, he thought, reaching for the receiver.
“Do we still publish you?” Faukman asked, half serious.
“Jonas!” Robert Langdon’s voice sounded anxious. “Thank God you’re there. I need your help.”
Faukman’s spirits lifted. “You’ve got pages for me to edit, Robert?” Finally?
“No, I need information. Last year, I connected you with a scientist named Katherine Solomon, the sister of
Peter Solomon?”
Faukman frowned. No pages.
“She was looking for a publisher for a book on Noetic Science? Do you remember her?”
Faukman rolled his eyes. “Sure. I remember. And thanks a million for that introduction. Not only did she
refuse to let me read the results of her research, she didn’t want to publish anything until some magical date
in the future.”
“Jonas, listen to me, I don’t have time. I need Katherine’s phone number. Right now. Do you have it?”
“I’ve got to warn you . . . you’re acting a little desperate. She’s great looking, but you’re not going to impress
her by—”
“This is no joke, Jonas, I need her number now.”
“All right . . . hold on.” Faukman and Langdon had been close friends for enough years that Faukman knew
when Langdon was serious. Jonas typed the name Katherine Solomon into a search window and began
scanning the company’s e-mail server.
“I’m looking now,” Faukman said. “And for what it’s worth, when you call her, you may not want to call
from the Harvard Pool. It sounds like you’re in an asylum.”
“I’m not at the pool. I’m in a tunnel under the U.S. Capitol.”
Faukman sensed from Langdon’s voice that he was not joking. What is it with this guy? “Robert, why can’t
you just stay home and write?” His computer pinged. “Okay, hold on . . . I got it.” He moused through the
old e-mail thread. “It looks like all I have is her cell.”
“I’ll take it.”
Faukman gave him the number.
“Thanks, Jonas,” Langdon said, sounding grateful. “I owe you one.”
“You owe me a manuscript, Robert. Do you have any idea how long—”
The line went dead.
Faukman stared at the receiver and shook his head. Book publishing would be so much easier without the
authors.
CHAPTER 45
Katherine Solomon did a double take when she saw the name on her caller ID. She had imagined the
incoming call was from Trish, checking in to explain why she and Christopher Abaddon were taking so long.
But the caller was not Trish.
Far from it.
Katherine felt a blushing smile cross her lips. Could tonight get any stranger? She flipped open her phone.
“Don’t tell me,” she said playfully. “Bookish bachelor seeking single Noetic Scientist?”
“Katherine!” The deep voice belonged to Robert Langdon. “Thank God you’re okay.”
“Of course I’m okay,” she replied, puzzled. “Other than the fact that you never called me after that party at
Peter’s house last summer.”
“Something has happened tonight. Please listen.” His normally smooth voice sounded ragged. “I’m so sorry
to have to tell you this . . . but Peter is in serious trouble.”
Katherine’s smile disappeared. “What are you talking about?”
“Peter . . .” Langdon hesitated as if searching for words. “I don’t know how to say it, but he’s been . . . taken.
I’m not sure how or by whom, but—”
“Taken?” Katherine demanded. “Robert, you’re scaring me. Taken . . . where?”
“Taken captive.” Langdon’s voice cracked as if he were overwhelmed. “It must have happened earlier today
or maybe yesterday.”
“This isn’t funny,” she said angrily. “My brother is fine. I just spoke to him fifteen minutes ago!”
“You did?!” Langdon sounded stunned.
“Yes! He just texted me to say he was coming to the lab.”
“He texted you . . .” Langdon thought out loud. “But you didn’t actually hear his voice?”
“No, but—”
“Listen to me. The text you received was not from your brother. Someone has Peter’s phone. He’s
dangerous. Whoever it is tricked me into coming to Washington tonight.”
“Tricked you? You’re not making any sense!”
“I know, I’m so sorry.” Langdon seemed uncharacteristically disorientated. “Katherine, I think you could be
in danger.”
Katherine Solomon was sure that Langdon would never joke about something like this, and yet he sounded
like he had lost his mind. “I’m fine,” she said. “I’m locked inside a secure building!”
“Read me the message you got from Peter’s phone. Please.”
Bewildered, Katherine pulled up the text message and read it to Langdon, feeling a chill as she came to the
final part referencing Dr. Abaddon. “‘If available, have Dr. Abaddon join us inside. I trust him fully . . .’ ”
“Oh God . . .” Langdon’s voice was laced with fear. “Did you invite this man inside?”
“Yes! My assistant just went out to the lobby to get him. I expect them back any—”
“Katherine, get out!” Langdon yelled. “Now!”
At the other side of the SMSC, inside the security room, a phone began ringing, drowning out the Redskins
game. The guard reluctantly pulled out his earbuds one more time.
“Lobby,” he answered. “This is Kyle.”
“Kyle, it’s Katherine Solomon!” Her voice sounded anxious, out of breath.
“Ma’am, your brother has not yet—”
“Where’s Trish?!” she demanded. “Can you see her on the monitors?”
The guard rolled his chair over to look at the screens. “She hasn’t gotten back to the Cube yet?”
“No!” Katherine shouted, sounding alarmed.
The guard now realized that Katherine Solomon was out of breath, as if she were running. What’s going on
back there?
The guard quickly worked the video joystick, skimming through frames of digital video at rapid speed.
“Okay, hold on, scrolling through playback . . . I’ve got Trish with your guest leaving the lobby . . . they
move down the Street . . . fast-forwarding . . . okay, they’re going into Wet Pod . . . Trish uses her key card to
unlock the door . . . both of them step into Wet Pod . . . fast-forwarding . . . okay, here they are coming out of
Wet Pod just a minute ago . . . heading down . . .” He cocked his head, slowing the playback. “Wait a minute.
That’s odd.”
“What?”
“The gentleman came out of Wet Pod alone.”
“Trish stayed inside?”
“Yes, it looks that way. I’m watching your guest now . . . he’s in the hall on his own.”
“Where is Trish?” Katherine asked more frantically.
“I don’t see her on the video feed,” he replied, an edge of anxiety creeping into his voice. He looked back at
the screen and noticed that the man’s jacket sleeves appeared to be wet . . . all the way up to his elbows.
What in the world did he do in Wet Pod? The guard watched as the man began to move purposefully down
the main hallway toward Pod 5, clutching in his hand what looked like . . . a key card.
The guard felt the hair on the back of his neck stand on end. “Ms. Solomon, we’ve got a serious problem.”
Tonight was a night of firsts for Katherine Solomon.
In two years, she had never used her cell phone inside the void. Nor had she ever crossed the void at a dead
run. At the moment, however, Katherine had a cell phone pressed to her ear while she was dashing blindly
along the endless length of carpet. Each time she felt a foot stray from the carpet, she corrected back to
center, racing on through the sheer darkness.
“Where is he now?” Katherine asked the guard, breathless.
“Checking now,” the guard replied. “Fast-forwarding . . . okay, here he is walking down the hall . . . moving
toward Pod Five . . .”
Katherine ran harder, hoping to reach the exit before she got trapped back here. “How long until he gets to
the Pod Five entrance?”
The guard paused. “Ma’am, you don’t understand. I’m still fast-forwarding. This is recorded playback. This
already happened.” He paused. “Hold on, let me check the entry event monitor.” He paused and then said,
“Ma’am, Ms. Dunne’s key card shows a Pod Five entry event about a minute ago.”
Katherine slammed on the brakes, sliding to a halt in the middle of the abyss. “He already unlocked Pod
Five?” she whispered into the phone.
The guard was typing frantically. “Yes, it looks like he entered . . . ninety seconds ago.”
Katherine’s body went rigid. She stopped breathing. The darkness felt suddenly alive all around her.
He’s in here with me.
In an instant, Katherine realized that the only light in the entire space was coming from her cell phone,
illuminating the side of her face. “Send help,” she whispered to the guard. “And get to Wet Pod to help
Trish.” Then she quietly closed her phone, extinguishing the light.
Absolute darkness settled around her.
She stood stock-still and breathed as quietly as possible. After a few seconds, the pungent scent of ethanol
wafted out of the darkness in front of her. The smell got stronger. She could sense a presence, only a few feet
in front of her on the carpet. In the silence, the pounding of Katherine’s heart seemed loud enough to give her
away. Silently, she stepped out of her shoes and inched to her left, sidestepping off the carpet. The cement
felt cold under her feet. She took one more step to clear the carpet.
One of her toes cracked.
It sounded like a gunshot in the stillness.
Only a few yards away, a rustle of clothing suddenly came at her out of the darkness. Katherine bolted an
instant too late and a powerful arm snagged her, groping in the darkness, hands violently attempting to gain
purchase. She spun away as a viselike grip caught her lab coat, yanking her backward, reeling her in.
Katherine threw her arms backward, slithering out of her lab coat and slipping free. Suddenly, with no idea
anymore which way was out, Katherine Solomon found herself dashing, dead blind, across an endless black
abyss.
CHAPTER 46
Despite containing what many have called “the most beautiful room in the world,” the Library of Congress
is known less for its breathtaking splendor than for its vast collections. With over five hundred miles of
shelves—enough to stretch from Washington, D.C., to Boston—it easily claims the title of largest library on
earth. And yet still it expands, at a rate of over ten thousand items per day.
As an early repository for Thomas Jefferson’s personal collection of books on science and philosophy, the
library stood as a symbol of America’s commitment to the dissemination of knowledge. One of the first
buildings in Washington to have electric lights, it literally shone like a beacon in the darkness of the New
World.
As its name implies, the Library of Congress was established to serve Congress, whose venerated members
worked across the street in the Capitol Building. This age-old bond between library and Capitol had been
fortified recently by the construction of a physical connection—a long tunnel beneath Independence Avenue
that linked the two buildings.
Tonight, inside this dimly lit tunnel, Robert Langdon followed Warren Bellamy through a construction zone,
trying to quell his own deepening concern for Katherine. This lunatic is at her lab?! Langdon didn’t even
want to imagine why. When he had called to warn her, Langdon had told Katherine exactly where to meet
him before they hung up. How much longer is this damned tunnel? His head ached now, a roiling torrent of
interconnected thoughts: Katherine, Peter, the Masons, Bellamy, pyramids, ancient prophecy . . . and a map.
Langdon shook it all off and pressed on. Bellamy promised me answers.
When the two men finally reached the end of the passage, Bellamy guided Langdon through a set of double
doors that were still under construction. Finding no way to lock the unfinished doors behind them, Bellamy
improvised, grabbing an aluminum ladder from the construction supplies and leaning it precariously against
the outside of the door. Then he balanced a metal bucket on top. If anyone opened the door, the bucket would
crash loudly to the floor.
That’s our alarm system? Langdon eyed the perched bucket, hoping Bellamy had a more comprehensive plan
for their safety tonight. Everything had happened so fast, and Langdon was only now starting to process the
repercussions of his fleeing with Bellamy. I’m a fugitive from the CIA.
Bellamy led the way around a corner, where the two men began ascending a wide staircase that was
cordoned off with orange pylons. Langdon’s daybag weighed him down as he climbed. “The stone pyramid,”
he said, “I still don’t understand—”
“Not here,” Bellamy interrupted. “We’ll examine it in the light. I know a safe place.”
Langdon doubted such a place existed for anyone who had just physically assaulted the director of the CIA’s
Office of Security.
As the two men reached the top of the stairs, they entered a wide hallway of Italian marble, stucco, and gold
leaf. The hall was lined with eight pairs of statues—all depicting the goddess Minerva. Bellamy pressed on,
leading Langdon eastward, through a vaulted archway, into a far grander space.
Even in the dim, after-hours lighting, the library’s great hall shone with the classical grandeur of an opulent
European palace. Seventy-five feet overhead, stained-glass skylights glistened between paneled beams
adorned with rare “aluminum leaf”—a metal that was considered to be more precious than gold at one time.
Beneath that, a stately course of paired pillars lined the second-floor balcony, accessible by two magnificent
curling staircases whose newel posts supported giant bronze female figures raising torches of enlightenment.
In a bizarre attempt to reflect this theme of modern enlightenment and yet stay within the decorative register
of Renaissance architecture, the stairway banisters had been carved with cupidlike putti portrayed as modern
scientists. An angelic electrician holding a telephone? A cherubic entomologist with a specimen box?
Langdon wondered what Bernini would have thought.
“We’ll talk over here,” Bellamy said, leading Langdon past the bulletproof display cases that contained the
library’s two most valuable books—the Giant Bible of Mainz, handwritten in the 1450s, and America’s copy
of the Gutenberg Bible, one of only three perfect vellum copies in the world. Fittingly, the vaulted ceiling
overhead bore John White Alexander’s six-panel painting titled The Evolution of the Book.
Bellamy strode directly to a pair of elegant double doors at the center rear of the east-corridor wall. Langdon
knew what room lay beyond those doors, but it seemed a strange choice for a conversation. Notwithstanding
the irony of talking in a space filled with “Silence Please” signs, this room hardly seemed like a “safe place.”
Located dead center of the library’s cruciform-shaped floor plan, this chamber served as the heart of the
building. Hiding in here was like breaking into a cathedral and hiding on the altar.
Nonetheless, Bellamy unlocked the doors, stepped into the darkness beyond, and groped for the lights. When
he flipped the switch, one of America’s great architectural masterpieces seemed to materialize out of thin air.
The famous reading room was a feast for the senses. A voluminous octagon rose 160 feet at its center, its
eight sides finished in chocolate-brown Tennessee marble, cream-colored Siena marble, and apple-red
Algerian marble. Because it was lit from eight angles, no shadows fell anywhere, creating the effect that the
room itself was glowing.
“Some say it’s the most striking room in Washington,” Bellamy said, ushering Langdon inside.
Maybe in the whole world, Langdon thought as he stepped across the threshold. As always, his gaze first
ascended straight up to the towering central collar, where rays of arabesque coffers curled down the dome to
an upper balcony. Encircling the room, sixteen bronze “portrait” statues peered down from the balustrade.
Beneath them, a stunning arcade of archways formed a lower balcony. Down at floor level, three concentric
circles of burnished wood desks radiated out from the massive octagonal circulation desk.
Langdon returned his focus to Bellamy, who was now propping the room’s double doors wide open. “I
thought we were hiding,” Langdon said, confused.
“If anyone enters the building,” Bellamy said, “I want to hear them coming.”
“But won’t they find us instantly in here?”
“No matter where we hide, they’ll find us. But if anyone corners us in this building, you’ll be very glad I
chose this room.”
Langdon had no idea why, but Bellamy apparently wasn’t looking to discuss it. He was already on the move
toward the center of the room, where he selected one of the available reading desks, pulled up two chairs, and
flipped on the reading light. Then he motioned to Langdon’s bag.
“Okay, Professor, let’s have a closer look.”
Not wanting to risk scratching its polished surface with a rough piece of granite, Langdon hoisted his entire
bag onto the desk and unzipped it, folding the sides all the way down to reveal the pyramid inside. Warren
Bellamy adjusted the reading lamp and studied the pyramid carefully. He ran his fingers over the unusual
engraving.
“I assume you recognize this language?” Bellamy asked.
“Of course,” Langdon replied, eyeing the sixteen symbols.
Known as the Freemason’s Cipher, this encoded language had been used for private communication among
early Masonic brothers. The encryption method had been abandoned long ago for one simple reason—it was
much too easy to break. Most of the students in Langdon’s senior symbology seminar could break this code
in about five minutes. Langdon, with a pencil and paper, could do it in under sixty seconds.
The notorious breakability of this centuries-old encryption scheme now presented a couple of paradoxes.
First, the claim that Langdon was the only person on earth who could break it was absurd. Second, for Sato
to suggest that a Masonic cipher was an issue of national security was like her suggesting our nuclear launch
codes were encrypted with a Cracker Jack decoder ring. Langdon was still struggling to believe any of it.
This pyramid is a map? Pointing to the lost wisdom of the ages?
“Robert,” Bellamy said, his tone grave. “Did Director Sato tell you why she is so interested in this?”
Langdon shook his head. “Not specifically. She just kept saying it was an issue of national security. I assume
she’s lying.”
“Perhaps,” Bellamy said, rubbing the back of his neck. He seemed to be struggling with something. “But
there is a far more troubling possibility.” He turned to look Langdon in the eye. “It’s possible that Director
Sato has discovered this pyramid’s true potential.”
CHAPTER 47
The blackness engulfing Katherine Solomon felt absolute.
Having fled the familiar safety of the carpet, she was now groping blindly forward, her outstretched hands
touching only empty space as she staggered deeper into the desolate void. Beneath her stockinged feet, the
endless expanse of cold cement felt like a frozen lake . . . a hostile environment from which she now needed
to escape.
No longer smelling ethanol, she stopped and waited in darkness. Standing dead still, she listened, willing her
heart to stop pounding so loudly. The heavy footsteps behind her seemed to have stopped. Did I lose him?
Katherine closed her eyes and tried to imagine where she was. Which direction did I run? Where is the door?
It was no use. She was so turned around now that the exit could be anywhere.
Fear, Katherine had once heard, acted as a stimulant, sharpening the mind’s ability to think. Right now,
however, her fear had turned her mind into a tumbling torrent of panic and confusion. Even if I find the exit, I
can’t get out. Her key card had been lost when she’d shed her lab coat. Her only hope seemed to be that she
was now a needle in a haystack—a single point on a thirty-thousand-square-foot grid. Despite the
overwhelming urge to flee, Katherine’s analytical mind told her instead to make the only logical move—no
move at all. Stay still. Don’t make a sound. The security guard was on his way, and for some unknown
reason, her attacker smelled strongly of ethanol. If he gets too close, I’ll know it.
As Katherine stood in silence, her mind raced over what Langdon had said. Your brother . . . he’s been taken.
She felt a bead of cold sweat materialize on her arm and trickle down, toward the cell phone still clenched in
her right hand. It was a danger she had forgotten to consider. If the phone rang, it would give away her
position, and she could not turn it off without opening it and illuminating the display.
Set down the phone . . . and move away from it.
But it was too late. The smell of ethanol approached on her right. And now it grew stronger. Katherine
struggled to stay calm, forcing herself to
override the instinct to run. Carefully, slowly, she took one step to her left. The faint rustle of her clothing
was apparently all her attacker needed. She heard him lunge, and the smell of ethanol washed over her as a
powerful hand grabbed at her shoulder. She twisted away, raw terror gripping her. Mathematical probability
went out the window, and Katherine broke into a blind sprint. She veered hard to the left, changing course,
dashing blindly now into the void.
The wall materialized out of nowhere.
Katherine hit it hard, knocking the wind from her lungs. Pain blossomed in her arm and shoulder, but she
managed to stay on her feet. The oblique angle at which she had collided with the wall had spared her the full
force of the blow, but it was little comfort now. The sound had echoed everywhere. He knows where I am.
Doubled over in pain, she turned her head and stared out into the blackness of the pod and sensed him staring
back at her.
Change your location. Now!
Still struggling to catch her breath, she began moving down the wall, touching her left hand quietly to each
exposed steel stud as she passed. Stay along the wall. Slip past him before he corners you. In her right hand,
Katherine still clutched her cell phone, ready to hurl it as a projectile if need be.
Katherine was in no way prepared for the sound she heard next—the clear rustle of clothing directly in front
of her . . . against the wall. She froze, stock-still, and stopped breathing. How could he be on the wall
already? She felt a faint puff of air, laced with the stench of ethanol. He’s moving down the wall toward me!
Katherine backed up several steps. Then, turning silently 180 degrees, she began moving quickly in the
opposite direction down the wall. She moved twenty feet or so when the impossible happened. Once again,
directly in front of her, along the wall, she heard the rustling sound of clothing. Then came the same puff of
air and the smell of ethanol. Katherine Solomon froze in place.
My God, he’s everywhere!
Bare-chested, Mal’akh stared into the darkness.
The smell of ethanol on his sleeves had proven a liability, and so he had transformed it into an asset,
stripping off his shirt and jacket and using them to help corner his prey. Throwing his jacket against the wall
to the right, he had heard Katherine stop short and change direction. Now, having thrown his shirt ahead to
the left, Mal’akh had heard her stop again. He had effectively corralled Katherine against the wall by
establishing points beyond which she dared not pass.
Now he waited, ears straining in the silence. She has only one direction she can move—directly toward me.
Even so, Mal’akh heard nothing. Either Katherine was paralyzed with fear, or she had decided to stand still
and wait for help to enter Pod 5. Either way she loses. Nobody would be entering Pod 5 anytime soon;
Mal’akh had disabled the outer keypad with a very crude, yet very effective, technique. After using Trish’s
key card, he had rammed a single dime deep into the key-card slot to prevent any other key-card use without
first dismantling the entire mechanism.
You and I are alone, Katherine . . . for as long as this takes.
Mal’akh inched silently forward, listening for any movement. Katherine Solomon would die tonight in the
darkness of her brother’s museum. A poetic end. Mal’akh looked forward to sharing the news of Katherine’s
death with her brother. The old man’s anguish would be long-awaited revenge.
Suddenly in the darkness, to Mal’akh’s great surprise, he saw a tiny glow in the distance and realized
Katherine had just made a deadly error in judgment. She’s phoning for help?! The electronic display that had
just flickered to life was hovering waist high, about twenty yards ahead, like a shining beacon on a vast
ocean of black. Mal’akh had been prepared to wait Katherine out, but now he wouldn’t have to.
Mal’akh sprang into motion, racing toward the hovering light, knowing he had to reach her before she could
complete her call for help. He was there in a matter of seconds, and he lunged, arms outstretched on either
side of her glowing cell phone, preparing to engulf her.
Mal’akh’s fingers jammed into a solid wall, bending backward and almost breaking. His head collided next,
crashing into a steel beam. He cried out in pain as he crumpled beside the wall. Cursing, he clambered back
to his feet, pulling himself up by the waist-high, horizontal strut on which Katherine Solomon had cleverly
placed her open cell phone.
Katherine was running again, this time with no concern for the noise her hand was making as it bounced
rhythmically off the evenly spaced metal studs of Pod 5. Run! If she followed the wall all the way around the
pod, she knew that sooner or later she would feel the exit door.
Where the hell is the guard?
The even spacing of the studs continued as she ran with her left hand on the sidewall and her right out in
front of her for protection. When will I reach the corner? The sidewall seemed to go on and on, but suddenly
the rhythm of the studs was broken. Her left hand hit empty space for several long strides, and then the studs
began again. Katherine slammed on the brakes and backed up, feeling her way across the smooth metal
panel. Why are there no studs here?
She could hear her attacker lumbering loudly after her now, groping his way down the wall in her direction.
Even so, it was a different sound that scared Katherine even more—the distant rhythmic banging of a
security guard pounding his flashlight against the Pod 5 door.
The guard can’t get in?
While the thought was terrifying, the location of his banging—diagonally to her right—instantly oriented
Katherine. She could now picture where in Pod 5 she was located. The visual flash brought with it an
unexpected realization. She now knew what this flat panel on the wall was.
Every pod was equipped with a specimen bay—a giant movable wall that could be retracted for transporting
oversize specimens in and out of the pods. Like those of an airplane hangar, this door was mammoth, and
Katherine in her wildest dreams had never imagined needing to open it. At the moment, though, it seemed
like her only hope.
Is it even operable?
Katherine fumbled blindly in the blackness, searching the bay door until she found the large metal handle.
Grasping it, she threw her weight backward, trying to slide open the door. Nothing. She tried again. It didn’t
budge.
She could hear her attacker closing faster now, homing in on the sounds of her efforts. The bay door is
locked! Wild with panic, she slid her hands all over the door, feeling the surface for any latch or lever. She
suddenly hit what felt like a vertical pole. She followed it down to the floor, crouching, and could feel it was
inserted into a hole in the cement. A security rod! She stood up, grabbed the pole, and, lifting with her legs,
slid the rod up and out of the hole.
He’s almost here!
Katherine groped now for the handle, found it again, and heaved back on it with all her might. The massive
panel seemed barely to move, and yet a sliver of moonlight now sliced into Pod 5. Katherine pulled again.
The shaft of light from outside the building grew wider. A little more! She pulled one last time, sensing her
attacker was now only a few feet away.
Leaping toward the light, Katherine wriggled her slender body sideways into the opening. A hand
materialized in the darkness, clawing at her, trying to pull her back inside. She heaved herself through the
opening, pursued by a massive bare arm that was covered with tattooed scales. The terrifying arm writhed
like an angry snake trying to seize her.
Katherine spun and fled down the long, pale outer wall of Pod 5. The bed of loose stones that surrounded the
entire perimeter of the SMSC cut into her stockinged feet as she ran, but she pressed on, heading for the main
entrance. The night was dark, but with her eyes fully dilated from the utter blackness of Pod 5, she could see
perfectly—almost as if it were daylight. Behind her, the heavy bay door ground open, and she heard heavy
footsteps accelerating in pursuit down the side of the building. The footsteps seemed impossibly fast.
I’ll never outrun him to the main entrance. She knew her Volvo was closer, but even that would be too far.
I’m not going to make it.
Then Katherine realized she had one final card to play.
As she neared the corner of Pod 5, she could hear his footsteps quickly overtaking her in the darkness. Now
or never. Instead of rounding the corner, Katherine suddenly cut hard to her left, away from the building, out
onto the grass. As she did so, she closed her eyes tightly, placed both hands over her face, and began running
totally blind across the lawn.
The motion-activated security lighting that blazed to life around Pod 5 transformed night into day instantly.
Katherine heard a scream of pain behind her as the brilliant floodlights seared into her assailant’s hyper
dilated pupils with over twenty-five-million candlepower of light. She could hear him stumbling on the loose
stones.
Katherine kept her eyes tightly closed, trusting herself on the open lawn. When she sensed she was far
enough away from the building and the lights, she opened her eyes, corrected her course, and ran like hell
through the dark.
Her Volvo’s keys were exactly where she always left them, in the center console. Breathless, she seized the
keys in her trembling hands and found the ignition. The engine roared to life, and her headlights flipped on,
illuminating a terrifying sight.
A hideous form raced toward her.
Katherine froze for an instant.
The creature caught in her headlights was a bald and bare-chested animal, its skin covered with tattooed
scales, symbols, and text. He bellowed as he ran into the glare, raising his hands before his eyes like a cavedwelling
beast seeing sunlight for the first time. She reached for the gearshift but suddenly he was there,
hurling his elbow through her side window, sending a shower of safety glass into her lap.
A massive scale-covered arm burst through her window, groping half blind, finding her neck. She threw the
car in reverse, but her attacker had latched on to her throat, squeezing with unimaginable force. She turned
her head in an attempt to escape his grasp, and suddenly she was staring at his face. Three dark stripes, like
fingernail scratches, had torn through his face makeup to reveal the tattoos beneath. His eyes were wild and
ruthless.
“I should have killed you ten years ago,” he growled. “The night I killed your mother.”
As his words registered, Katherine was seized by a horrifying memory: that feral look in his eyes—she had
seen it before. It’s him. She would have screamed had it not been for the viselike grip around her neck.
She smashed her foot onto the accelerator, and the car lurched backward, almost snapping her neck as he was
dragged beside her car. The Volvo careened up an inclined median, and Katherine could feel her neck about
to give way beneath his weight. Suddenly tree branches were scraping the side of her car, slapping through
the side windows, and the weight was gone.
The car burst through the evergreens and out into the upper parking lot, where Katherine slammed on the
brakes. Below her, the half-naked man clambered to his feet, staring into her headlights. With a terrifying
calm, he raised a menacing scale-covered arm and pointed directly at her.
Katherine’s blood coursed with raw fear and hatred as she spun the wheel and hit the gas. Seconds later, she
was fishtailing out onto Silver Hill Road.
CHAPTER 48
In the heat of the moment, Capitol police officer Nuñez had seen no option but to help the Capitol Architect
and Robert Langdon escape. Now, however, back in the basement police headquarters, Nuñez could see the
storm clouds gathering fast.
Chief Trent Anderson was holding an ice pack to his head while another officer was tending to Sato’s
bruises. Both of them were standing with the video surveillance team, reviewing digital playback files in an
attempt to locate Langdon and Bellamy.
“Check the playback on every hallway and exit,” Sato demanded. “I want to know where they went!”
Nuñez felt ill as he looked on. He knew it would be only a matter of minutes before they found the right
video clip and learned the truth. I helped them escape. Making matters worse was the arrival of a four-man
CIA field team that was now staging nearby, prepping to go after Langdon and Bellamy. These guys looked
nothing like the Capitol Police. These guys were dead-serious soldiers . . . black camouflage, night vision,
futuristic-looking handguns.
Nuñez felt like he would throw up. Making up his mind, he motioned discreetly to Chief Anderson. “A word,
Chief?”
“What is it?” Anderson followed Nuñez into the hall.
“Chief, I made a bad mistake,” Nuñez said, breaking a sweat. “I’m sorry, and I’m resigning.” You’ll fire me
in a few minutes anyway.
“I beg your pardon?”
Nuñez swallowed hard. “Earlier, I saw Langdon and Architect Bellamy in the visitor center on their way out
of the building.”
“What?!” Anderson bellowed. “Why didn’t you say something?!”
“The Architect told me not to say a word.”
“You work for me, goddamm it!” Anderson’s voice echoed down the corridor. “Bellamy smashed my head
into a wall, for Christ’s sake!”
Nuñez handed Anderson the key that the Architect had given him.
“What is this?” Anderson demanded.
“A key to the new tunnel under Independence Avenue. Architect Bellamy had it. That’s how they escaped.”
Anderson stared down at the key, speechless.
Sato poked her head out into the hallway, eyes probing. “What’s going on out here?”
Nuñez felt himself go pale. Anderson was still holding the key, and Sato clearly had seen it. As the hideous
little woman drew near, Nuñez improvised as best as he could, hoping to protect his chief. “I found a key on
the floor in the subbasement. I was just asking Chief Anderson if he knew what it might go to.”
Sato arrived, eyeing the key. “And does the chief know?”
Nuñez glanced up at Anderson, who was clearly weighing all his options before speaking. Finally, the chief
shook his head. “Not offhand. I’d have to check the—”
“Don’t bother,” Sato said. “This key unlocks a tunnel off the visitor center.”
“Really?” Anderson said. “How do you know that?”
“We just found the surveillance clip. Officer Nuñez here helped Langdon and Bellamy escape and then
relocked that tunnel door behind them. Bellamy gave Nuñez that key.”
Anderson turned to Nuñez with a flare of anger. “Is this true?!”
Nuñez nodded vigorously, doing his best to play along. “I’m sorry, sir. The Architect told me not to tell a
soul!”
“I don’t give a damn what the Architect told you!” Anderson yelled. “I expect—”
“Shut up, Trent,” Sato snapped. “You’re both lousy liars. Save it for your CIA inquisition.” She snatched the
Architect’s tunnel key from Anderson. “You’re done here.”
CHAPTER 49
Robert Langdon hung up his cell phone, feeling increasingly worried. Katherine’s not answering her cell?
Katherine had promised to call him as soon as she was safely out of the lab and on her way to meet him here,
but she had never done so.
Bellamy sat beside Langdon at the reading-room desk. He, too, had just made a call, his to an individual he
claimed could offer them sanctuary—a safe place to hide. Unfortunately, this person was not answering
either, and so Bellamy had left an urgent message, telling him to call Langdon’s cell phone right away.
“I’ll keep trying,” he said to Langdon, “but for the moment, we’re on our own. And we need to discuss a plan
for this pyramid.”
The pyramid. For Langdon, the spectacular backdrop of the reading room had all but disappeared, his world
constricting now to include only what was directly in front of him—a stone pyramid, a sealed package
containing a capstone, and an elegant African American man who had materialized out of the darkness and
rescued him from the certainty of a CIA interrogation.
Langdon had expected a modicum of sanity from the Architect of the Capitol, but now it seemed Warren
Bellamy was no more rational than the madman claiming Peter was in purgatory. Bellamy was insisting this
stone pyramid was, in fact, the Masonic Pyramid of legend. An ancient map? That guides us to powerful
wisdom?
“Mr. Bellamy,” Langdon said politely, “this idea that there exists some kind of ancient knowledge that can
imbue men with great power . . . I simply can’t take it seriously.”
Bellamy’s eyes looked both disappointed and earnest, making Langdon’s skepticism all the more awkward.
“Yes, Professor, I had imagined you might feel this way, but I suppose I should not be surprised. You are an
outsider looking in. There exist certain Masonic realities that you will perceive as myth because you are not
properly initiated and prepared to understand them.”
Now Langdon felt patronized. I wasn’t a member of Odysseus’s crew, but I’m certain the Cyclops is a myth.
“Mr. Bellamy, even if the legend is true . . . this pyramid cannot possibly be the Masonic Pyramid.”
“No?” Bellamy ran a finger across the Masonic cipher on the stone. “It looks to me like it fits the description
perfectly. A stone pyramid with a shining metal capstone, which, according to Sato’s X-ray, is exactly what
Peter entrusted to you.” Bellamy picked up the little cube-shaped package, weighing it in his hand.
“This stone pyramid is less than a foot tall,” Langdon countered. “Every version of the story I’ve ever heard
describes the Masonic Pyramid as enormous.”
Bellamy had clearly anticipated this point. “As you know, the legend speaks of a pyramid rising so high that
God Himself can reach out and touch it.”
“Exactly.”
“I can see your dilemma, Professor. However, both the Ancient Mysteries and Masonic philosophy celebrate
the potentiality of God within each of us. Symbolically speaking, one could claim that anything within reach
of an enlightened man . . . is within reach of God.”
Langdon felt unswayed by the wordplay.
“Even the Bible concurs,” Bellamy said. “If we accept, as Genesis tells us, that ‘God created man in his own
image,’ then we also must accept what this implies—that mankind was not created inferior to God. In Luke
17:20 we are told, ‘The kingdom of God is within you.’ ”
“I’m sorry, but I don’t know any Christians who consider themselves God’s equal.”
“Of course not,” Bellamy said, his tone hardening. “Because most Christians want it both ways. They want to
be able to proudly declare they are believers in the Bible and yet simply ignore those parts they find too
difficult or too inconvenient to believe.”
Langdon made no response.
“Anyhow,” Bellamy said, “the Masonic Pyramid’s age-old description as being tall enough to be touched by
God . . . this has long led to misinterpretations about its size. Conveniently, it keeps academics like yourself
insisting the pyramid is a legend, and nobody searches for it.”
Langdon looked down at the stone pyramid. “I apologize that I’m frustrating you,” he said. “I’ve simply
always thought of the Masonic Pyramid as a myth.”
“Does it not seem perfectly fitting to you that a map created by stonemasons would be carved in stone?
Throughout history, our most important guideposts have always been carved in stone—including the tablets
God gave Moses—Ten Commandments to guide our human conduct.”
“I understand, and yet it is always referred to as the Legend of the Masonic Pyramid. Legend implies it is
mythical.”
“Yes, legend.” Bellamy chuckled. “I’m afraid you’re suffering from the same problem Moses had.”
“I’m sorry?”
Bellamy looked almost amused as he turned in his seat, glancing up at the second-tier balcony, where sixteen
bronze statues peered down at them. “Do you see Moses?”
Langdon gazed up at the library’s celebrated statue of Moses. “Yes.”
“He has horns.”
“I’m aware of that.”
“But do you know why he has horns?”
Like most teachers, Langdon did not enjoy being lectured to. The Moses above them had horns for the same
reason thousands of Christian images of Moses had horns—a mistranslation of the book of Exodus. The
original Hebrew text described Moses as having “karan ’ohr panav”—“facial skin that glowed with rays of
light”—but when the Roman Catholic Church created the official Latin translation of the Bible, the translator
bungled Moses’s description, rendering it as “cornuta esset facies sua,” meaning “his face was horned.”
From that moment on, artists and sculptors, fearing reprisals if they were not true to the Gospels, began
depicting Moses with horns.
“It was a simple mistake,” Langdon replied. “A mistranslation by Saint Jerome around four hundred A.D.”
Bellamy looked impressed. “Exactly. A mistranslation. And the result is . . . poor Moses is now misshapen
for all history.”
“Misshapen” was a nice way to put it. Langdon, as a child, had been terrified when he saw Michelangelo’s
diabolical “horned Moses”—the centerpiece of Rome’s Basilica of St. Peter in Chains.
“I mention the horned Moses,” Bellamy now said, “to illustrate how a single word, misunderstood, can
rewrite history.”
You’re preaching to the choir, Langdon thought, having learned the lesson firsthand in Paris a number of
years back. SanGreal: Holy Grail. SangReal: Royal Blood.
“In the case of the Masonic Pyramid,” Bellamy continued, “people heard whispers about a ‘legend.’ And the
idea stuck. The Legend of the Masonic Pyramid sounded like a myth. But the word legend was referring to
something else. It had been misconstrued. Much like the word talisman.” He smiled. “Language can be very
adept at hiding the truth.”
“That’s true, but you’re losing me here.”
“Robert, the Masonic Pyramid is a map. And like every map, it has a legend—a key that tells you how to
read it.” Bellamy took the cube-shaped package and held it up. “Don’t you see? This capstone is the legend
to the pyramid. It is the key that tells you how to read the most powerful artifact on earth . . . a map that
unveils the hiding place of mankind’s greatest treasure—the lost wisdom of the ages.”
Langdon fell silent.
“I humbly submit,” Bellamy said, “that your towering Masonic Pyramid is only this . . . a modest stone
whose golden capstone reaches high enough to be touched by God. High enough that an enlightened man can
reach down and touch it.”
Silence hung between the two men for several seconds.
Langdon felt an unexpected pulse of excitement as he looked down at the pyramid, seeing it in a new light.
His eyes moved again to the Masonic cipher. “But this code . . . it seems so . . .”
“Simple?”
Langdon nodded. “Almost anyone could decipher this.”
Bellamy smiled and retrieved a pencil and paper for Langdon. “Then perhaps you should enlighten us?”
Langdon felt uneasy about reading the code, and yet considering the circumstances, it seemed a minor
betrayal of Peter’s trust. Moreover, whatever the engraving said, he could not imagine that it unveiled a
secret hiding place of anything at all . . . much less that of one of history’s greatest treasures.
Langdon accepted the pencil from Bellamy and tapped it on his chin as he studied the cipher. The code was
so simple that he barely needed pencil and paper. Even so, he wanted to ensure he made no mistakes, and so
he dutifully put pencil to paper and wrote down the most common decryption key for a Masonic cipher. The
key consisted of four grids—two plain and two dotted—with the alphabet running through them in order.
Each letter of the alphabet was now positioned inside a uniquely shaped “enclosure” or “pen.” The shape of
each letter’s enclosure became the symbol for that letter.
The scheme was so simple, it was almost infantile.
Langdon double-checked his handiwork. Feeling confident the decryption key was correct, he now turned his
attention back to the code inscribed on the pyramid. To decipher it, all he had to do was to find the matching
shape on his decryption key and write down the letter inside it.
The first character on the pyramid looked like a down arrow or a chalice. Langdon quickly found the chaliceshaped
segment on the decryption key. It was located in the lower left-hand corner and enclosed the letter S.
Langdon wrote down S.
The next symbol on the pyramid was a dotted square missing its right side. That shape on the decryption grid
enclosed the letter O.
He wrote down O.
The third symbol was a simple square, which enclosed the letter E.
Langdon wrote down E.
S O E . . .
He continued, picking up speed until he had completed the entire grid.
Now, as he gazed down at his finished translation, Langdon let out a puzzled sigh. Hardly what I’d call a
eureka moment.
Bellamy’s face showed the hint of a smile. “As you know, Professor, the Ancient Mysteries are reserved only
for the truly enlightened.”
“Right,” Langdon said, frowning. Apparently, I don’t qualify.
CHAPTER 50
In a basement office deep inside CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, the same sixteen-character Masonic
cipher glowed brightly on a high-definition computer monitor. Senior OS analyst Nola Kaye sat alone and
studied the image that had been e-mailed to her ten minutes ago by her boss, Director Inoue Sato.
Is this some kind of joke? Nola knew it was not, of course; Director Sato had no sense of humor, and the
events of tonight were anything but a joking matter. Nola’s high-level clearance within the CIA’s all-seeing
Office of Security had opened her eyes to the shadow worlds of power. But what Nola had witnessed in the
last twenty-four hours had changed her impressions forever of the secrets that powerful men kept.
“Yes, Director,” Nola now said, cradling the phone on her shoulder as she talked to Sato. “The engraving is
indeed the Masonic cipher. However, the cleartext is meaningless. It appears to be a grid of random letters.”
She gazed down at her decryption.
“It must say something,” Sato insisted.
“Not unless it has a second layer of encryption that I’m not aware of.”
“Any guesses?” Sato asked.
“It’s a grid-based matrix, so I could run the usual—Vigenère, grilles, trellises, and so forth—but no promises,
especially if it’s a onetime pad.”
“Do what you can. And do it fast. How about the X-ray?”
Nola swiveled her chair to a second system, which displayed a standard
security X-ray of someone’s bag. Sato had requested information on what appeared to be a small pyramid
inside a cube-shaped box. Normally, a two-inch-tall object would not be an issue of national security unless
it was made of enriched plutonium. This one was not. It was made of something almost equally startling.
“Image-density analysis was conclusive,” Nola said. “Nineteen-point-three grams per cubic centimeter. It’s
pure gold. Very, very valuable.”
“Anything else?”
“Actually, yes. The density scan picked up minor irregularities on the surface of the gold pyramid. It turns
out the gold is engraved with text.”
“Really?” Sato sounded hopeful. “What does it say?”
“I can’t tell yet. The inscription is extremely faint. I’m trying to enhance with filters, but the resolution on the
X-ray is not great.”
“Okay, keep trying. Call me when you have something.”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“And, Nola?” Sato’s tone turned ominous. “As with everything you have learned in the last twenty-four
hours, the images of the stone pyramid and gold capstone are classified at the highest levels of security. You
are to consult no one. You report to me directly. I want to make sure that is clear.”
“Of course, ma’am.”
“Good. Keep me posted.” Sato hung up.
Nola rubbed her eyes and looked blearily back at her computer screens. She had not slept in over thirty-six
hours, and she knew damn well she would not sleep again until this crisis had reached its conclusion.
Whatever that may be.
Back at the Capitol Visitor Center, four black-clad CIA field-op specialists stood at the entrance to the
tunnel, peering hungrily down the dimly lit shaft like a pack of dogs eager for the hunt.
Sato approached, having just hung up from a call. “Gentlemen,” she said, still holding the Architect’s key,
“are your mission parameters clear?”
“Affirmative,” the lead agent replied. “We have two targets. The first is an engraved stone pyramid,
approximately one foot tall. The second is a smaller, cube-shaped package, approximately two inches tall.
Both were last seen in Robert Langdon’s shoulder bag.”
“Correct,” Sato said. “These two items must be retrieved quickly and intact. Do you have any questions?”
“Parameters for use of force?”
Sato’s shoulder was still throbbing from where Bellamy had struck her with a bone. “As I said, it is of critical
importance that these items be retrieved.”
“Understood.” The four men turned and headed into the darkness of the tunnel.
Sato lit a cigarette and watched them disappear.
CHAPTER 51
Katherine Solomon had always been a prudent driver, but now she was pushing her Volvo at over ninety as
she fled blindly up the Suitland Parkway. Her trembling foot had been lodged on the accelerator for a full
mile before her panic began to lift. She now realized her uncontrollable shivering was no longer solely from
fear.
I’m freezing.
The wintry night air was gushing through her shattered window, buffeting her body like an arctic wind. Her
stockinged feet were numb, and she reached down for her spare pair of shoes, which she kept beneath the
passenger seat. As she did, she felt a stab of pain from the bruise on her throat, where the powerful hand had
latched on to her neck.
The man who had smashed through her window bore no resemblance to the blond-haired gentleman whom
Katherine knew as Dr. Christopher Abaddon. His thick hair and smooth, tanned complexion had disappeared.
His shaved head, bare chest, and makeup-smeared face had been unveiled as a terrifying tapestry of tattoos.
She heard his voice again, whispering to her in the howl of wind outside her broken window. Katherine, I
should have killed you years ago . . . the night I killed your mother.
Katherine shivered, feeling no doubt. That was him. She had never forgotten the look of fiendish violence in
his eyes. Nor had she ever forgotten the sound of her brother’s single gunshot, which had killed this man,
propelling him off a high ledge into the frozen river below, where he plummeted through the ice and never
resurfaced. Investigators had searched for weeks, never finding his body, and finally decided it had been
washed away by the current out to the Chesapeake Bay.
They were wrong, she now knew. He is still alive.
And he’s back.
Katherine felt angst-ridden as the memories flooded back. It was almost exactly ten years ago. Christmas
Day. Katherine, Peter, and their mother—her entire family—were gathered at their sprawling stone mansion
in Potomac, nestled on a two-hundred-acre wooded estate with its own river running through it.
As was tradition, their mother worked diligently in the kitchen, rejoicing in the holiday custom of cooking
for her two children. Even at seventy-five years of age, Isabel Solomon was an exuberant cook, and tonight
the mouthwatering smells of roast venison, parsnip gravy, and garlic mashed potatoes wafted through the
house. While Mother prepared the feast, Katherine and her brother relaxed in the conservatory, discussing
Katherine’s latest fascination—a new field called Noetic Science. An unlikely fusion of modern particle
physics and ancient mysticism, Noetics had absolutely captivated Katherine’s imagination.
Physics meets philosophy.
Katherine told Peter about some of the experiments she was dreaming up, and she could see in his eyes that
he was intrigued. Katherine felt particularly pleased to give her brother something positive to think about this
Christmas, since the holiday had also become a painful reminder of a terrible tragedy.
Peter’s son, Zachary.
Katherine’s nephew’s twenty-first birthday had been his last. The family had been through a nightmare, and
it seemed that her brother was only now finally learning how to laugh again.
Zachary had been a late bloomer, frail and awkward, a rebellious and angry teenager. Despite his deeply
loving and privileged upbringing, the boy seemed determined to detach himself from the Solomon
“establishment.” He was kicked out of prep school, partied hard with the “celebrati,” and shunned his
parents’ exhaustive attempts to provide him firm and loving guidance.
He broke Peter’s heart.
Shortly before Zachary’s eighteenth birthday, Katherine had sat down with her mother and brother and
listened to them debating whether or not to withhold Zachary’s inheritance until he was more mature. The
Solomon inheritance—a centuries-old tradition in the family—bequeathed a staggeringly generous piece of
the Solomon wealth to every Solomon child on his or her eighteenth birthday. The Solomons believed that an
inheritance was more helpful at the beginning of someone’s life than at the end. Moreover, placing large
pieces of the Solomon fortune in the hands of eager young descendants had been the key to growing the
family’s dynastic wealth.
In this case, however, Katherine’s mother argued that it was dangerous to give Peter’s troubled son such a
large sum of money. Peter disagreed.
“The Solomon inheritance,” her brother had said, “is a family tradition that should not be broken. This
money may well force Zachary to be more responsible.”
Sadly, her brother had been wrong.
The moment Zachary received the money, he broke from the family, disappearing from the house without
taking any of his belongings. He surfaced a few months later in the tabloids: TRUST FUND PLAYBOY
LIVING EUROPEAN HIGH LIFE.
The tabloids took joy in documenting Zachary’s spoiled life of debauchery. The photos of wild parties on
yachts and drunken disco stupors were hard for the Solomons to take, but the photos of their wayward teen
turned from tragic to frightening when the papers reported Zachary had been caught carrying cocaine across
a border in Eastern Europe: SOLOMON MILLIONAIRE IN TURKISH PRISON.
The prison, they learned, was called Soganlik—a brutal F-class detention center located in the Kartal district
outside of Istanbul. Peter Solomon, fearing for his son’s safety, flew to Turkey to retrieve him. Katherine’s
distraught brother returned empty-handed, having been forbidden even to visit with Zachary. The only
promising news was that Solomon’s influential contacts at the U.S. State Department were working on
getting him extradited as quickly as possible.
Two days later, however, Peter received a horrifying international phone call. The next morning, headlines
blared: SOLOMON HEIR MURDERED IN PRISON.
The prison photos were horrific, and the media callously aired them all, even long after the Solomons’
private burial ceremony. Peter’s wife never forgave him for failing to free Zachary, and their marriage came
to an end six months later. Peter had been alone ever since.
It was years later that Katherine, Peter, and their mother, Isabel, were gathered quietly for Christmas. The
pain was still a presence in their family, but mercifully it was fading with each passing year. The pleasant
rattle of pots and pans now echoed from the kitchen as their mother prepared the traditional feast. Out in the
conservatory, Peter and Katherine were enjoying a baked Brie and relaxed holiday conversation.
Then came an utterly unexpected sound.
“Hello, Solomons,” an airy voice said behind them.
Startled, Katherine and her brother spun to see an enormous muscular figure stepping into the conservatory.
He wore a black ski mask that covered all of his face except his eyes, which shone with feral ferocity.
Peter was on his feet in an instant. “Who are you?! How did you get in here?!”
“I knew your little boy, Zachary, in prison. He told me where this key was hidden.” The stranger held up an
old key and grinned like a beast. “Right before I bludgeoned him to death.”
Peter’s mouth fell open.
A pistol appeared, aimed directly at Peter’s chest. “Sit.”
Peter fell back into his chair.
As the man moved into the room, Katherine was frozen in place. Behind his mask, the man’s eyes were wild
like those of a rabid animal.
“Hey!” Peter yelled, as if trying to warn their mother in the kitchen. “Whoever you are, take what you want,
and get out!”
The man leveled his gun at Peter’s chest. “And what is it you think I want?”
“Just tell me how much,” Solomon said. “We don’t have money in the house, but I can—”
The monster laughed. “Do not insult me. I have not come for money. I have come tonight for Zachary’s other
birthright.” He grinned. “He told me about the pyramid.”
Pyramid? Katherine thought in bewildered terror. What pyramid?
Her brother was defiant. “I don’t know what you’re talking about.”
“Don’t play dumb with me! Zachary told me what you keep in your study vault. I want it. Now.”
“Whatever Zachary told you, he was confused,” Peter said. “I don’t know what you’re talking about!”
“No?” The intruder turned and aimed the gun at Katherine’s face. “How about now?”
Peter’s eyes filled with terror. “You must believe me! I don’t know what it is you want!”
“Lie to me one more time,” he said, still aiming at Katherine, “and I swear I will take her from you.” He
smiled. “And from what Zachary said, your little sister is more precious to you than all your—”
“What’s going on?!” Katherine’s mother shouted, marching into the room with Peter’s Browning Citori
shotgun—which she aimed directly at the man’s chest. The intruder spun toward her, and the feisty seventyfive-
year-old woman wasted no time. She fired a deafening blast of pellets. The intruder staggered backward,
firing his handgun wildly in all directions, shattering windows as he fell and crashed through the glass
doorway, dropping the pistol as he fell.
Peter was instantly in motion, diving on the loose handgun. Katherine had fallen, and Mrs. Solomon hurried
to her side, kneeling beside her. “My God, are you hurt?!”
Katherine shook her head, mute with shock. Outside the shattered glass door, the masked man had clambered
to his feet and was running into the woods, clutching his side as he ran. Peter Solomon glanced back to make
sure his mother and sister were safe, and seeing they were fine, he held the pistol and raced out the door after
the intruder.
Katherine’s mother held her hand, trembling. “Thank heavens you’re okay.” Then suddenly her mother
pulled away. “Katherine? You’re bleeding! There’s blood! You’re hurt!”
Katherine saw the blood. A lot of blood. It was all over her. But she felt no pain.
Her mother frantically searched Katherine’s body for a wound. “Where does it hurt!”
“Mom, I don’t know, I don’t feel anything!”
Then Katherine saw the source of the blood, and she went cold. “Mom, it’s not me . . .” She pointed to the
side of her mother’s white satin blouse, where blood was running freely, and a small tattered hole was
visible. Her mother glanced down, looking more confused than anything else. She winced and shrank back,
as if the pain had just hit her.
“Katherine?” Her voice was calm, but suddenly it carried the weight of her seventy-five years. “I need you to
call an ambulance.”
Katherine ran to the hall phone and called for help. When she got back to the conservatory, she found her
mother lying motionless in a pool of blood. She ran to her, crouching down, cradling her mother’s body in
her arms.
Katherine had no idea how much time had passed when she heard the distant gunshot in the woods. Finally,
the conservatory door burst open, and her brother, Peter, rushed in, eyes wild, gun still in his hand. When he
saw Katherine sobbing, holding their lifeless mother in her arms, his face contorted in anguish. The scream
that echoed through the conservatory was a sound Katherine Solomon would never forget.
CHAPTER 52
Mal’akh could feel the tattooed muscles on his back rippling as he sprinted back around the building toward
the open bay door of Pod 5.
I must gain access to her lab.
Katherine’s escape had been unanticipated . . . and problematic. Not only did she know where Mal’akh lived,
she now knew his true identity . . . and that he was the one who had invaded their home a decade earlier.
Mal’akh had not forgotten that night either. He had come within inches of possessing the pyramid, but
destiny had obstructed him. I was not yet ready. But he was ready now. More powerful. More influential.
Having endured unthinkable hardship in preparation for his return, Mal’akh was poised tonight to fulfill his
destiny at last. He felt certain that before the night was over, he would indeed be staring into the dying eyes
of Katherine Solomon.
As Mal’akh reached the bay door, he reassured himself that Katherine had not truly escaped; she had only
prolonged the inevitable. He slid through the opening and strode confidently across the darkness until his feet
hit the carpet. Then he took a right turn and headed for the Cube. The banging on the door of Pod 5 had
stopped, and Mal’akh suspected the guard was now trying to remove the dime Mal’akh had jammed into the
key panel to render it useless.
When Mal’akh reached the door that led into the Cube, he located the outer keypad and inserted Trish’s key
card. The panel lit up. He entered Trish’s PIN and went inside. The lights were all ablaze, and as he moved
into the sterile space, he squinted in amazement at the dazzling array of equipment. Mal’akh was no stranger
to the power of technology; he performed his own breed of science in the basement of his home, and last
night some of that science had borne fruit.
The Truth.
Peter Solomon’s unique confinement—trapped alone in the in-between—had laid bare all of the man’s
secrets. I can see his soul. Mal’akh had learned certain secrets he anticipated, and others he had not,
including the news about Katherine’s lab and her shocking discoveries. Science is getting close, Mal’akh had
realized. And I will not allow it to light the way for the unworthy.
Katherine’s work here had begun using modern science to answer ancient philosophical questions. Does
anyone hear our prayers? Is there life after death? Do humans have souls? Incredibly, Katherine had
answered all of these questions, and more. Scientifically. Conclusively. The methods she used were
irrefutable. Even the most skeptical of people would be persuaded by the results of her experiments. If this
information were published and made known, a fundamental shift would begin in the consciousness of man.
They will start to find their way. Mal’akh’s last task tonight, before his transformation, was to ensure that this
did not happen.
As he moved through the lab, Mal’akh located the data room that Peter had told him about. He peered
through the heavy glass walls at the two holographic data-storage units. Exactly as he said they would be.
Mal’akh found it hard to imagine that the contents of these little boxes could change the course of human
development, and yet Truth had always been the most potent of all the catalysts.
Eyeing the holographic storage units, Mal’akh produced Trish’s key card and inserted it in the door’s
security panel. To his surprise, the panel did not light up. Apparently, access to this room was not a trust
extended to Trish Dunne. He now reached for the key card he had found in Katherine’s lab-coat pocket.
When he inserted this one, the panel lit up.
Mal’akh had a problem. I never got Katherine’s PIN. He tried Trish’s PIN, but it didn’t work. Stroking his
chin, he stepped back and examined the three-inch-thick Plexiglas door. Even with an ax, he knew he would
be unable to break through and obtain the drives he needed to destroy.
Mal’akh had planned for this contingency, however.
Inside the power-supply room, exactly as Peter had described, Mal’akh located the rack holding several
metal cylinders resembling large scuba tanks. The cylinders bore the letters LH, the number 2, and the
universal symbol for combustible. One of the canisters was connected to the lab’s hydrogen fuel cell.
Mal’akh left one canister connected and carefully heaved one of the reserve cylinders down onto a dolly
beside the rack. Then he rolled the cylinder out of the power-supply room, across the lab, to the Plexiglas
door of the data-storage room. Although this location would certainly be plenty close enough, he had noticed
one weakness in the heavy Plexiglas door—the small space between the bottom and the jamb.
At the threshold, he carefully laid the canister on its side and slid the flexible rubber tube beneath the door. It
took him a moment to remove the safety seals and access the cylinder’s valve, but once he did, ever so
gently, he uncocked the valve. Through the Plexiglas, he could see the clear, bubbling liquid begin draining
out of the tube onto the floor inside the storage room. Mal’akh watched the puddle expand, oozing across the
floor, steaming and bubbling as it grew. Hydrogen remained in liquid form only when it was cold, and as it
warmed up, it would start to boil off. The resulting gas, conveniently, was even more flammable than the
liquid.
Remember the Hindenburg.
Mal’akh hurried now into the lab and retrieved the Pyrex jug of Bunsen-burner fuel—a viscous, highly
flammable, yet noncombustible oil. He carried it to the Plexiglas door, pleased to see the liquid hydrogen
canister was still draining, the puddle of boiling liquid inside the data-storage room now covering the entire
floor, encircling the pedestals that supported the holographic storage units. A whitish mist now rose from the
boiling puddle as the liquid hydrogen began turning to gas . . . filling the small space.
Mal’akh raised the jug of Bunsen-burner fuel and squirted a healthy amount on the hydrogen canister, the
tubing, and into the small opening beneath the door. Then, very carefully, he began backing out of the lab,
leaving an unbroken stream of oil on the floor as he went.
The dispatch operator handling 911 calls for Washington, D.C., had been unusually busy tonight. Football,
beer, and a full moon, she thought as yet another emergency call appeared on her screen, this one from a gasstation
pay phone on the Suitland Parkway in Anacostia. A car accident probably.
“Nine-one-one,” she answered. “What is your emergency?”
“I was just attacked at the Smithsonian Museum Support Center,” a panicked woman’s voice said. “Please
send the police! Forty-two-ten Silver Hill Road!”
“Okay, slow down,” the operator said. “You need to—”
“I need you to send officers also to a mansion in Kalorama Heights where I think my brother may be held
captive!”
The operator sighed. Full moon.
CHAPTER 53
As I tried to tell you,” Bellamy was saying to Langdon, “there is more to this pyramid than meets the eye.”
Apparently so. Langdon had to admit that the stone pyramid sitting in his unzipped daybag looked much
more mysterious to him now. His decryption of the Masonic cipher had rendered a seemingly meaningless
grid of letters.
Chaos.
For a long while, Langdon examined the grid, searching for any hint of meaning within the letters—hidden
words, anagrams, clues of any sort—but he found nothing.
“The Masonic Pyramid,” Bellamy explained, “is said to guard its secrets behind many veils. Each time you
pull back a curtain, you face another. You have unveiled these letters, and yet they tell you nothing until you
peel back another layer. Of course, the way to do that is known only to the one who holds the capstone. The
capstone, I suspect, has an inscription as well, which tells you how to decipher the pyramid.”
Langdon glanced at the cube-shaped package on the desk. From what Bellamy had said, Langdon now
understood that the capstone and pyramid were a “segmented cipher”—a code broken into pieces. Modern
cryptologists used segmented ciphers all the time, although the security scheme had been invented in ancient
Greece. The Greeks, when they wanted to store secret information, inscribed it on a clay tablet and then
shattered the tablet into pieces, storing each piece in a separate location. Only when all the pieces were
gathered together could the secrets be read. This kind of inscribed clay tablet—called a symbolon—was in
fact the origin of the modern word symbol.
“Robert,” Bellamy said, “this pyramid and capstone have been kept apart for generations, ensuring the
secret’s safety.” His tone turned rueful. “Tonight, however, the pieces have come dangerously close. I’m sure
I don’t have to say this . . . but it is our duty to ensure this pyramid is not assembled.”
Langdon found Bellamy’s sense of drama to be somewhat overwrought. Is he describing the capstone and
pyramid . . . or a detonator and nuclear bomb? He still couldn’t quite accept Bellamy’s claims, but it hardly
seemed to matter. “Even if this is the Masonic Pyramid, and even if this inscription does somehow reveal the
location of ancient knowledge, how could that knowledge possibly impart the kind of power it is said to
impart?”
“Peter always told me you were a hard man to convince—an academic who prefers proof to speculation.”
“You’re saying you do believe that?” Langdon demanded, feeling impatient now. “Respectfully . . . you are a
modern, educated man. How could you believe such a thing?”
Bellamy gave a patient smile. “The craft of Freemasonry has given me a deep respect for that which
transcends human understanding. I’ve learned never to close my mind to an idea simply because it seems
miraculous.”
CHAPTER 54
Frantically, the SMSC perimeter patrolman dashed down the gravel pathway that ran along the outside of
the building. He’d just received a call from an officer inside saying that the keypad to Pod 5 had been
sabotaged, and that a security light indicated that Pod 5’s specimen bay door was now open.
What the hell is going on?!
As he arrived at the specimen bay, sure enough he found the door open a couple of feet. Bizarre, he thought.
This can only be unlocked from the inside. He took the flashlight off his belt and shone it into the inky
blackness of the pod. Nothing. Having no desire to step into the unknown, he moved only as far as the
threshold and then stuck the flashlight through the opening, swinging it to the left, and then to the—
Powerful hands seized his wrist and yanked him into the blackness. The guard felt himself being spun around
by an invisible force. He smelled ethanol. The flashlight flew out of his hand, and before he could even
process what was happening, a rock-hard fist collided with his sternum. The guard crumpled to the cement
floor . . . groaning in pain as a large black form stepped away from him.
The guard lay on his side, gasping and wheezing for breath. His flashlight lay nearby, its beam spilling across
the floor and illuminating what appeared to be a metal can of some sort. The can’s label said it was fuel oil
for a Bunsen burner.
A cigarette lighter sparked, and the orange flame illuminated a vision that hardly seemed human. Jesus
Christ! The guard barely had time to process what he was seeing before the bare-chested creature knelt down
and touched the flame to the floor.
Instantly, a strip of fire materialized, leaping away from them, racing into the void. Bewildered, the guard
looked back, but the creature was already slipping out the open bay door into the night.
The guard managed to sit up, wincing in pain as his eyes followed the thin ribbon of fire. What the hell?! The
flame looked too small to be truly
dangerous, and yet now he saw something utterly terrifying. The fire was no longer illuminating only the
darkened void. It had traveled all the way to the back wall, where it was now illuminating a massive cinderblock
structure. The guard had never been permitted inside Pod 5, but he knew very well what this structure
must be.
The Cube.
Katherine Solomon’s lab.
The flame raced in a straight line directly to the lab’s outer door. The guard clambered to his feet, knowing
full well that the ribbon of oil probably continued beneath the lab door . . . and would soon start a fire inside.
But as he turned to run for help, he felt an unexpected puff of air sucking past him.
For a brief instant, all of Pod 5 was bathed in light.
The guard never saw the hydrogen fireball erupting skyward, ripping the roof off Pod 5 and billowing
hundreds of feet into the air. Nor did he see the sky raining fragments of titanium mesh, electronic
equipment, and droplets of melted silicon from the lab’s holographic storage units.
Katherine Solomon was driving north when she saw the sudden flash of light in her rearview mirror. A deep
rumble thundered through the night air, startling her.
Fireworks? she wondered. Do the Redskins have a halftime show?
She refocused on the road, her thoughts still on the 911 call she’d placed from the deserted gas station’s pay
phone.
Katherine had successfully convinced the 911 dispatcher to send the police to the SMSC to investigate a
tattooed intruder and, Katherine prayed, to find her assistant, Trish. In addition, she urged the dispatcher to
check Dr. Abaddon’s address in Kalorama Heights, where she thought Peter was being held hostage.
Unfortunately, Katherine had been unable to obtain Robert Langdon’s unlisted cell-phone number. So now,
seeing no other option, she was speeding toward the Library of Congress, where Langdon had told her he
was headed.
The terrifying revelation of Dr. Abaddon’s true identity had changed everything. Katherine had no idea what
to believe anymore. All she knew for certain was that the same man who had killed her mother and nephew
all those years ago had now captured her brother and had come to kill her. Who is this madman? What does
he want? The only answer she could come up with made no sense. A pyramid? Equally confusing was why
this man had come to her lab tonight. If he wanted to hurt her, why hadn’t he done so in the privacy of his
own home earlier today? Why go to the trouble of sending a text message and risk breaking into her lab?
Unexpectedly, the fireworks in her rearview mirror grew brighter, the initial flash followed by an unexpected
sight—a blazing orange fireball that Katherine could see rising above the tree line. What in the world?! The
fireball was accompanied by dark black smoke . . . and it was nowhere near the Redskins’ FedEx Field.
Bewildered, she tried to determine what industry might be located on the other side of those trees . . . just
southeast of the parkway.
Then, like an oncoming truck, it hit her.
CHAPTER 55
Warren Bellamy stabbed urgently at the buttons on his cell phone, trying again to make contact with
someone who could help them, whoever that might be.
Langdon watched Bellamy, but his mind was with Peter, trying to figure out how best to find him. Decipher
the engraving, Peter’s captor had commanded, and it will tell you the hiding place of mankind’s greatest
treasure . . . We will go together . . . and make our trade.
Bellamy hung up, frowning. Still no answer.
“Here’s what I don’t understand,” Langdon said. “Even if I could somehow accept that this hidden wisdom
exists . . . and that this pyramid somehow points to its underground location . . . what am I looking for? A
vault? A bunker?”
Bellamy sat quietly for a long moment. Then he gave a reluctant sigh and spoke guardedly. “Robert,
according to what I’ve heard through the years, the pyramid leads to the entrance of a spiral staircase.”
“A staircase?”
“That’s right. A staircase that leads down into the earth . . . many hundreds of feet.”
Langdon could not believe what he was hearing. He leaned closer.
“I’ve heard it said that the ancient wisdom is buried at the bottom.”
Robert Langdon stood up and began pacing. A spiral staircase descending hundreds of feet into the earth . . .
in Washington, D.C. “And nobody has ever seen this staircase?”
“Allegedly the entrance has been covered with an enormous stone.”
Langdon sighed. The idea of a tomb covered with an enormous stone was right out of the biblical accounts of
Jesus’ tomb. This archetypal hybrid was the grandfather of them all. “Warren, do you believe this secret
mystical staircase into the earth exists?”
“I’ve never seen it personally, but a few of the older Masons swear it exists. I was trying to call one of them
just now.”
Langdon continued pacing, uncertain what to say next.
“Robert, you leave me a difficult task with respect to this pyramid.” Warren Bellamy’s gaze hardened in the
soft glow of the reading lamp. “I know of no way to force a man to believe what he does not want to believe.
And yet I hope you understand your duty to Peter Solomon.”
Yes, I have a duty to help him, Langdon thought.
“I don’t need you to believe in the power this pyramid can unveil. Nor do I need you to believe in the
staircase it supposedly leads to. But I do need you to believe that you are morally obliged to protect this
secret . . . whatever it may be.” Bellamy motioned to the little cube-shaped package. “Peter entrusted the
capstone to you because he had faith you would obey his wishes and keep it secret. And now you must do
exactly that, even if it means sacrificing Peter’s life.”
Langdon stopped short and wheeled around. “What?!”
Bellamy remained seated, his expression pained but resolute. “It’s what he would want. You need to forget
Peter. He’s gone. Peter did his job, doing the best he could to protect the pyramid. Now it is our job to make
sure his efforts were not in vain.”
“I can’t believe you’re saying this!” Langdon exclaimed, temper flaring. “Even if this pyramid is everything
you say it is, Peter is your Masonic brother. You’re sworn to protect him above all else, even your country!”
“No, Robert. A Mason must protect a fellow Mason above all things . . . except one—the great secret our
brotherhood protects for all mankind. Whether or not I believe this lost wisdom has the potential that history
suggests, I have taken a vow to keep it out of the hands of the unworthy. And I would not give it over to
anyone . . . even in exchange for Peter Solomon’s life.”
“I know plenty of Masons,” Langdon said angrily, “including the most advanced, and I’m damned sure these
men are not sworn to sacrifice their lives for the sake of a stone pyramid. And I’m also damned sure none of
them believes in a secret staircase that descends to a treasure buried deep in the earth.”
“There are circles within circles, Robert. Not everyone knows everything.”
Langdon exhaled, trying to control his emotions. He, like everyone, had heard the rumors of elite circles
within the Masons. Whether or not it was true seemed irrelevant in the face of this situation. “Warren, if this
pyramid and capstone truly reveal the ultimate Masonic secret, then why would Peter involve me? I’m not
even a brother . . . much less part of any inner circle.”
“I know, and I suspect that is precisely why Peter chose you to guard it. This pyramid has been targeted in the
past, even by those who infiltrated our brotherhood with unworthy motives. Peter’s choice to store it outside
the brotherhood was a clever one.”
“Were you aware I had the capstone?” Langdon asked.
“No. And if Peter told anyone at all, it would have been only one man.” Bellamy pulled out his cell phone
and hit redial. “And so far, I’ve been unable to reach him.” He got a voice-mail greeting and hung up. “Well,
Robert, it looks like you and I are on our own for the moment. And we have a decision to make.”
Langdon looked at his Mickey Mouse watch. 9:42 P.M. “You do realize that Peter’s captor is waiting for me
to decipher this pyramid tonight and tell him what it says.”
Bellamy frowned. “Great men throughout history have made deep personal sacrifices to protect the Ancient
Mysteries. You and I must do the same.” He stood up now. “We should keep moving. Sooner or later Sato
will figure out where we are.”
“What about Katherine?!” Langdon demanded, not wanting to leave. “I can’t reach her, and she never
called.”
“Obviously, something happened.”
“But we can’t just abandon her!”
“Forget Katherine!” Bellamy said, his voice commanding now. “Forget Peter! Forget everyone! Don’t you
understand, Robert, that you’ve been entrusted with a duty that is bigger than all of us—you, Peter,
Katherine, myself?” He locked eyes with Langdon. “We need to find a safe place to hide this pyramid and
capstone far from—”
A loud metallic crash echoed in the direction of the great hall.
Bellamy wheeled, eyes filling with fear. “That was fast.”
Langdon turned toward the door. The sound apparently had come from the metal bucket that Bellamy had
placed on the ladder blocking the tunnel doors. They’re coming for us.
Then, quite unexpectedly, the crash echoed again.
And again.
And again.
The homeless man on the bench in front of the Library of Congress rubbed his eyes and watched the strange
scene unfolding before him.
A white Volvo had just jumped the curb, lurched across the deserted pedestrian walkway, and screeched to a
halt at the foot of the library’s main entrance. An attractive, dark-haired woman had leaped out, anxiously
surveyed the area, and, spotting the homeless man, had shouted, “Do you have a phone?”
Lady, I don’t have a left shoe.
Apparently realizing as much, the woman dashed up the staircase toward the library’s main doors. Arriving
at the top of the stairs, she grabbed the handle and tried desperately to open each of the three giant doors.
The library’s closed, lady.
But the woman didn’t seem to care. She seized one of the heavy ring-shaped handles, heaved it backward,
and let it fall with a loud crash against the door. Then she did it again. And again. And again.
Wow, the homeless man thought, she must really need a book.
CHAPTER 56
When Katherine Solomon finally saw the massive bronze doors of the library swing open before her, she
felt as if an emotional floodgate had burst. All the fear and confusion she had bottled up tonight came
pouring through.
The figure in the library doorway was Warren Bellamy, a friend and confidant of her brother’s. But it was the
man behind Bellamy in the shadows whom Katherine felt happiest to see. The feeling was apparently mutual.
Robert Langdon’s eyes filled with relief as she rushed through the doorway . . . directly into his arms.
As Katherine lost herself in the comforting embrace of an old friend, Bellamy closed the front door. She
heard the heavy lock click into place, and at last she felt safe. Tears came unexpectedly, but she fought them
back.
Langdon held her. “It’s okay,” he whispered. “You’re okay.”
Because you saved me, Katherine wanted to tell him. He destroyed my lab . . . all my work. Years of
research . . . up in smoke. She wanted to tell him everything, but she could barely breathe.
“We’ll find Peter.” Langdon’s deep voice resonated against her chest, comforting her somehow. “I promise.”
I know who did this! Katherine wanted to yell. The same man who killed my mother and nephew! Before she
could explain herself, an unexpected sound broke the silence of the library.
The loud crash echoed up from beneath them in a vestibule stairwell—as if a large metal object had fallen on
a tile floor. Katherine felt Langdon’s muscles stiffen instantly.
Bellamy stepped forward, his expression dire. “We’re leaving. Now.”
Bewildered, Katherine followed as the Architect and Langdon hurried across the great hall toward the
library’s famed reading room, which was ablaze with light. Bellamy quickly locked the two sets of doors
behind them, first the outer, then the inner.
Katherine followed in a daze as Bellamy hustled them both toward the center of the room. The threesome
arrived at a reading desk where a leather bag sat beneath a light. Beside the bag, there was a tiny cube-shaped
package, which Bellamy scooped up and placed inside the bag, alongside a—
Katherine stopped short. A pyramid?
Although she had never seen this engraved stone pyramid, she felt her entire body recoil in recognition.
Somehow her gut knew the truth. Katherine Solomon had just come face-to-face with the object that had so
deeply damaged her life. The pyramid.
Bellamy zipped up the bag and handed it to Langdon. “Don’t let this out of your sight.”
A sudden explosion rocked the room’s outer doors. The tinkling of shattered glass followed.
“This way!” Bellamy spun, looking scared now as he rushed them over to the central circulation desk—eight
counters around a massive octagonal cabinet. He guided them in behind the counters and then pointed to an
opening in the cabinet. “Get in there!”
“In there?” Langdon demanded. “They’ll find us for sure!”
“Trust me,” Bellamy said. “It’s not what you think.”
CHAPTER 57
Mal’akh gunned his limousine north toward Kalorama Heights. The explosion in Katherine’s lab had been
bigger than he had anticipated, and he had been lucky to escape unscathed. Conveniently, the ensuing chaos
had enabled him to slip out without opposition, powering his limousine past a distracted gate guard who was
busy yelling into a telephone.
I’ve got to get off the road, he thought. If Katherine hadn’t yet phoned the police, the explosion would
certainly draw their attention. And a shirtless man driving a limousine would be hard to miss.
After years of preparation, Mal’akh could scarcely believe the night was now upon him. The journey to this
moment had been a long, difficult one. What began years ago in misery . . . will end tonight in glory.
On the night it all began, he had not had the name Mal’akh. In fact, on the night it all began, he had not had
any name at all. Inmate 37. Like most of the prisoners at the brutal Soganlik Prison outside of Istanbul,
Inmate 37 was here because of drugs.
He had been lying on his bunk in a cement cell, hungry and cold in the darkness, wondering how long he
would be incarcerated. His new cellmate, whom he’d met only twenty-four hours ago, was sleeping in the
bunk above him. The prison administrator, an obese alcoholic who hated his job and took it out on the
inmates, had just killed all the lights for the night.
It was almost ten o’clock when Inmate 37 heard the conversation filtering in through the ventilation shaft.
The first voice was unmistakably clear—the piercing, belligerent accent of the prison administrator, who
clearly did not appreciate being woken up by a late-night visitor.
“Yes, yes, you’ve come a long way,” he was saying, “but there are no visitors for the first month. State
regulations. No exceptions.”
The voice that replied was soft and refined, filled with pain. “Is my son safe?”
“He is a drug addict.”
“Is he being treated well?”
“Well enough,” the administrator said. “This is not a hotel.”
There was a pained pause. “You do realize the U.S. State Department will request extradition.”
“Yes, yes, they always do. It will be granted, although the paperwork might take us a couple of weeks . . . or
even a month . . . depending.”
“Depending on what?”
“Well,” the administrator said, “we are understaffed.” He paused. “Of course, sometimes concerned parties
like yourself make donations to the prison staff to help us push things through more quickly.”
The visitor did not reply.
“Mr. Solomon,” the administrator continued, lowering his voice, “for a man like yourself, for whom money
is no object, there are always options. I know people in government. If you and I work together, we may be
able to get your son out of here . . . tomorrow, with all the charges dropped. He would not even have to face
prosecution at home.”
The response was immediate. “Forgetting the legal ramifications of your suggestion, I refuse to teach my son
that money solves all problems or that there is no accountability in life, especially in a serious matter like
this.”
“You’d like to leave him here?”
“I’d like to speak to him. Right now.”
“As I said, we have rules. Your son is unavailable to you . . . unless you would like to negotiate his
immediate release.”
A cold silence hung for several moments. “The State Department will be contacting you. Keep Zachary safe.
I expect him on a plane home within the week. Good night.”
The door slammed.
Inmate 37 could not believe his ears. What kind of father leaves his son in this hellhole in order to teach him
a lesson? Peter Solomon had even rejected an offer to clear Zachary’s record.
It was later that night, lying awake in his bunk, that Inmate 37 had realized how he would free himself. If
money was the only thing separating a prisoner from freedom, then Inmate 37 was as good as free. Peter
Solomon might not be willing to part with money, but as anyone who read the tabloids knew, his son,
Zachary, had plenty of money, too. The next day, Inmate 37 spoke privately to the administrator and
suggested a plan—a bold, ingenious scheme that would give them both exactly what they wanted.
“Zachary Solomon would have to die for this to work,” explained Inmate 37. “But we could both disappear
immediately. You could retire to the Greek Islands. You would never see this place again.”
After some discussion, the two men shook hands. Soon Zachary Solomon will be dead, Inmate 37 thought,
smiling to think how easy it would be.
It was two days later that the State Department contacted the Solomon family with the horrific news. The
prison snapshots showed their son’s brutally bludgeoned body, lying curled and lifeless on the floor of his
prison cell. His head had been bashed in by a steel bar, and the rest of him was battered and twisted beyond
what was humanly imaginable. He appeared to have been tortured and finally killed. The prime suspect was
the prison administrator himself, who had disappeared, probably with all of the murdered boy’s money.
Zachary had signed papers moving his vast fortune into a private numbered account, which had been emptied
immediately following his death. There was no telling where the money was now.
Peter Solomon flew to Turkey on a private jet and returned with their son’s casket, which they buried in the
Solomon family cemetery. The prison administrator was never found. Nor would he be, Inmate 37 knew. The
Turk’s rotund body was now resting at the bottom of the Sea of Marmara, feeding the blue manna crabs that
migrated in through the Bosporus Strait. The vast fortune belonging to Zachary Solomon had all been moved
to an untraceable numbered account. Inmate 37 was a free man again—a free man with a massive fortune.
The Greek Islands were like heaven. The light. The water. The women.
There was nothing money couldn’t buy—new identities, new passports, new hope. He chose a Greek name—
Andros Dareios—Andros meaning “warrior,” and Dareios meaning “wealthy.” The dark nights in prison had
frightened him, and Andros vowed never to go back. He shaved off his shaggy hair and shunned the drug
world entirely. He began life anew—exploring never-before-imagined sensual pleasures. The serenity of
sailing alone on the ink-blue Aegean Sea became his new heroin trance; the sensuality of sucking moist arni
souvlakia right off the skewer became his new Ecstasy; and the rush of cliff diving into the foam-filled
ravines of Mykonos became his new cocaine.
I am reborn.
Andros bought a sprawling villa on the island of Syros and settled in among the bella gente in the exclusive
town of Possidonia. This new world was a community not only of wealth, but of culture and physical
perfection. His neighbors took great pride in their bodies and minds, and it was contagious. The newcomer
suddenly found himself jogging on the beach, tanning his pale body, and reading books. Andros read
Homer’s Odyssey, captivated by the images of powerful bronze men doing battle on these islands. The next
day, he began lifting weights, and was amazed to see how quickly his chest and arms grew larger. Gradually,
he began to feel women’s eyes on him, and the admiration was intoxicating. He longed to grow stronger still.
And he did. With the help of aggressive cycles of steroids intermixed with black-market growth hormones
and endless hours of weight lifting, Andros transformed himself into something he had never imagined he
could be—a perfect male specimen. He grew in both height and musculature, developing flawless pectorals
and massive, sinewy legs, which he kept perfectly tanned.
Everyone was looking now.
As Andros had been warned, the heavy steroids and hormones changed not only his body, but also his voice
box, giving him an eerie, breathy whisper, which made him feel more mysterious. The soft, enigmatic voice,
combined with his new body, his wealth, and his refusal to speak about his mysterious past, served as catnip
for the women who met him. They gave themselves willingly, and he satisfied them all—from fashion
models visiting his island on photo shoots, to nubile American college girls on vacation, to the lonely wives
of his neighbors, to the occasional young man. They could not get enough.
I am a masterpiece.
As the years passed, however, Andros’s sexual adventures began to lose their thrill. As did everything. The
island’s sumptuous cuisine lost its taste, books no longer held his interest, and even the dazzling sunsets from
his villa looked dull. How could this be? He was only in his midtwenties, and yet he felt old. What more is
there to life? He had sculpted his body into a masterpiece; he had educated himself and nourished his mind
with culture; he had made his home in paradise; and he had the love of anyone he desired.
And yet, incredibly, he felt as empty as he had in that Turkish prison.
What is it I am missing?
The answer had come to him several months later. Andros was sitting alone in his villa, absently surfing
channels in the middle of the night, when he stumbled across a program about the secrets of Freemasonry.
The show was poorly done, posing more questions than answers, and yet he found himself intrigued by the
plethora of conspiracy theories surrounding the brotherhood. The narrator described legend after legend.
Freemasons and the New World Order . . .
The Great Masonic Seal of the United States . . .
The P2 Masonic Lodge . . .
The Lost Secret of Freemasonry . . .
The Masonic Pyramid . . .
Andros sat up, startled. Pyramid. The narrator began recounting the story of a mysterious stone pyramid
whose encrypted engraving promised to lead to lost wisdom and unfathomable power. The story, though
seemingly implausible, sparked in him a distant memory . . . a faint recollection from a much darker time.
Andros remembered what Zachary Solomon had heard from his father about a mysterious pyramid.
Could it be? Andros strained to recall the details.
When the show ended, he stepped out onto the balcony, letting the cool air clear his mind. He remembered
more now, and as it all came back, he began to sense there might be some truth to this legend after all. And if
so, then Zachary Solomon—although long dead—still had something to offer.
What do I have to lose?
Three weeks later, his timing carefully planned, Andros stood in the frigid cold outside the conservatory of
the Solomons’ Potomac estate. Through the glass, he could see Peter Solomon chatting and laughing with his
sister, Katherine. It looks like they’ve had no trouble forgetting Zachary, he thought.
Before he pulled the ski mask over his face, Andros took a hit of cocaine, his first in ages. He felt the familiar
rush of fearlessness. He pulled out a handgun, used an old key to unlock the door, and stepped inside. “Hello,
Solomons.”
Unfortunately, the night had not gone as Andros had planned. Rather than obtaining the pyramid for which
he had come, he found himself riddled with bird shot and fleeing across the snow-covered lawn toward the
dense woods. To his surprise, behind him, Peter Solomon was giving chase, pistol glinting in his hand.
Andros dashed into the woods, running down a trail along the edge of a deep ravine. Far below, the sounds of
a waterfall echoed up through the crisp winter air. He passed a stand of oak trees and rounded a corner to his
left. Seconds later, he was skidding to a stop on the icy path, narrowly escaping death.
My God!
Only feet in front of him, the path ended, plunging straight down into an icy river far below. The large
boulder at the side of the path had been carved by the unskilled hand of a child:
On the far side of the ravine, the path continued on. So where’s the bridge?! The cocaine was no longer
working. I’m trapped! Panicking now, Andros turned to flee back up the path, but he found himself facing
Peter Solomon, who stood breathless before him, pistol in hand.
Andros looked at the gun and took a step backward. The drop behind him was at least fifty feet to an icecovered
river. The mist from the waterfall upstream billowed around them, chilling him to the bone.
“Zach’s bridge rotted out long ago,” Solomon said, panting. “He was the only one who ever came down this
far.” Solomon held the gun remarkably steady. “Why did you kill my son?”
“He was nothing,” Andros replied. “A drug addict. I did him a favor.”
Solomon moved closer, gun aimed directly at Andros’s chest. “Perhaps I should do you the same favor.” His
tone was surprisingly fierce. “You bludgeoned my son to death. How does a man do such a thing?”
“Men do the unthinkable when pushed to the brink.”
“You killed my son!”
“No,” Andros replied, hotly now. “You killed your son. What kind of man leaves his son in a prison when he
has the option to get him out! You killed your son! Not me.”
“You know nothing!” Solomon yelled, his voice filled with pain.
You’re wrong, Andros thought. I know everything.
Peter Solomon drew closer, only five yards away now, gun leveled. Andros’s chest was burning, and he
could tell he was bleeding badly. The warmth ran down over his stomach. He looked over his shoulder at the
drop. Impossible. He turned back to Solomon. “I know more about you than you think,” he whispered. “I
know you are not the kind of man who kills in cold blood.”
Solomon stepped closer, taking dead aim.
“I’m warning you,” Andros said, “if you pull that trigger, I will haunt you forever.”
“You already will.” And with that, Solomon fired.
As he raced his black limousine back toward Kalorama Heights, the one who now called himself Mal’akh
reflected on the miraculous events that had delivered him from certain death atop that icy ravine. He had
been transformed forever. The gunshot had echoed only for an instant, and yet its effects had reverberated
across decades. His body, once tanned and perfect, was now marred by scars from that night . . . scars he kept
hidden beneath the tattooed symbols of his new identity.
I am Mal’akh.
This was my destiny all along.
He had walked through fire, been reduced to ashes, and then emerged again . . . transformed once more.
Tonight would be the final step of his long and magnificent journey.
CHAPTER 58
The coyly nicknamed explosive Key4 had been developed by Special Forces specifically for opening locked
doors with minimal collateral damage. Consisting primarily of cyclotrimethylenetrinitramine with a
diethylhexyl plasticizer, it was essentially a piece of C-4 rolled into paper-thin sheets for insertion into
doorjambs. In the case of the library’s reading room, the explosive had worked perfectly.
Operation leader Agent Turner Simkins stepped over the wreckage of the doors and scanned the massive
octagonal room for any signs of movement. Nothing.
“Kill the lights,” Simkins said.
A second agent found the wall panel, threw the switches, and plunged the room into darkness. In unison, all
four men reached up and yanked down their night-vision headgear, adjusting the goggles over their eyes.
They stood motionless, surveying the reading room, which now materialized in shades of luminescent green
inside their goggles.
The scene remained unchanged.
Nobody made a dash for it in the dark.
The fugitives were probably unarmed, and yet the field team entered the room with weapons raised. In the
darkness, their firearms projected four menacing rods of laser light. The men washed the beams in all
directions, across the floor, up the far walls, into the balconies, probing the darkness. Oftentimes, a mere
glimpse of a laser-sighted weapon in a darkened room was enough to induce instant surrender.
Apparently not tonight.
Still no movement.
Agent Simkins raised his hand, motioning his team into the space. Silently, the men fanned out. Moving
cautiously up the center aisle, Simkins reached up and flipped a switch on his goggles, activating the newest
addition to the CIA’s arsenal. Thermal imaging had been around for years, but recent advances in
miniaturization, differential sensitivity, and dual-source integration had facilitated a new generation of vision
enhancing equipment that gave field agents eyesight that bordered on superhuman.
We see in the dark. We see through walls. And now . . . we see back in time.
Thermal-imaging equipment had become so sensitive to heat differentials that it could detect not only a
person’s location . . . but their previous locations. The ability to see into the past often proved the most
valuable asset of all. And tonight, once again, it proved its worth. Agent Simkins now spied a thermal
signature at one of the reading desks. The two wooden chairs luminesced in his goggles, registering a
reddish-purple color, indicating those chairs were warmer than the other chairs in the room. The desk lamp’s
bulb glowed orange. Obviously the two men had been sitting at the desk, but the question now was in which
direction they had gone.
He found his answer on the central counter that surrounded the large wooden console in the middle of the
room. A ghostly handprint, glowing crimson.
Weapon raised, Simkins moved toward the octagonal cabinet, training his laser sight across the surface. He
circled until he saw an opening in the side of the console. Did they really corner themselves in a cabinet?
The agent scanned the trim around the opening and saw another glowing handprint on it. Clearly someone
had grabbed the doorjamb as he ducked inside the console.
The time for silence was over.
“Thermal signature!” Simkins shouted, pointing at the opening. “Flanks converge!”
His two flanks moved in from opposite sides, effectively surrounding the octagonal console.
Simkins moved toward the opening. Still ten feet away, he could see a light source within. “Light inside the
console!” he shouted, hoping the sound of his voice might convince Mr. Bellamy and Mr. Langdon to exit
the cabinet with their hands up.
Nothing happened.
Fine, we’ll do this the other way.
As Simkins drew closer to the opening, he could hear an unexpected hum rumbling from within. It sounded
like machinery. He paused, trying to imagine what could be making such a noise in such a small space. He
inched closer, now hearing voices over the sound of machinery. Then, just as he arrived at the opening, the
lights inside went out.
Thank you, he thought, adjusting his night vision. Advantage, us.
Standing at the threshold, he peered through the opening. What lay beyond was unexpected. The console was
less of a cabinet than a raised ceiling over a steep set of stairs that descended into a room below. The agent
aimed his weapon down the stairs and began descending. The hum of machinery grew louder with every
step.
What the hell is this place?
The room beneath the reading room was a small, industrial-looking space. The hum he heard was indeed
machinery, although he was not sure whether it was running because Bellamy and Langdon had activated it,
or because it ran around the clock. Either way, it clearly made no difference. The fugitives had left their
telltale heat signatures on the room’s lone exit—a heavy steel door whose keypad showed four clear
fingerprints glowing on the numbers. Around the door, slivers of glowing orange shone beneath the
doorjamb, indicating that lights were illuminated on the other side.
“Blow the door,” Simkins said. “This was their escape route.”
It took eight seconds to insert and detonate a sheet of Key4. When the smoke cleared, the field-team agents
found themselves peering into a strange underground world known here as “the stacks.”
The Library of Congress had miles and miles of bookshelves, most of them underground. The endless rows
of shelves looked like some kind of “infinity” optical illusion created with mirrors.
A sign announced
TEMPERATURE-CONTROLLED ENVIRONMENT
Keep this door closed at all times.
Simkins pushed through the mangled doors and felt cool air beyond. He couldn’t help but smile. Could this
get any easier? Heat signatures in controlled environments showed up like solar flares, and already his
goggles revealed a glowing red smear on a banister up ahead, which Bellamy or Langdon had grabbed on to
while running past.
“You can run,” he whispered to himself, “but you can’t hide.”
As Simkins and his team advanced into the maze of stacks, he realized the playing field was tipped so
heavily in his favor that he would not even need his goggles to track his prey. Under normal circumstances,
this maze of stacks would have been a respectable hiding place, but the Library of Congress used motionactivated
lights to save energy, and the fugitives’ escape route was now lit up like a runway. A narrow strip
of illumination stretched into the distance, dodging and weaving as it went.
All the men ripped off their goggles. Surging ahead on well-trained legs, the field team followed the trail of
lights, zigging and zagging through a
seemingly endless labyrinth of books. Soon Simkins began seeing lights flickering on in the darkness up
ahead. We’re gaining. He pushed harder, faster, until he heard footsteps and labored breathing ahead. Then
he saw a target.
“I’ve got visual!” he yelled.
The lanky form of Warren Bellamy was apparently bringing up the rear. The primly dressed African
American staggered through the stacks, obviously out of breath. It’s no use, old man.
“Stop right there, Mr. Bellamy!” Simkins yelled.
Bellamy kept running, turning sharp corners, weaving through the rows of books. At every turn, the lights
kept coming on over his head.
As the team drew within twenty yards, they shouted again to stop, but Bellamy ran on.
“Take him down!” Simkins commanded.
The agent carrying the team’s nonlethal rifle raised it and fired. The projectile that launched down the aisle
and wrapped itself around Bellamy’s legs was nicknamed Silly String, but there was nothing silly about it. A
military technology invented at Sandia National Laboratories, this nonlethal “incapacitant” was a thread of
gooey polyurethane that turned rock hard on contact, creating a rigid web of plastic across the back of the
fugitive’s knees. The effect on a running target was that of jamming a stick into the spokes of a moving bike.
The man’s legs seized midstride, and he pitched forward, crashing to the floor. Bellamy slid another ten feet
down a darkened aisle before coming to a stop, the lights above him flickering unceremoniously to life.
“I’ll deal with Bellamy,” Simkins shouted. “You keep going after Langdon! He must be up ahead some—”
The team leader stopped, now seeing that the library stacks ahead of Bellamy were all pitch-black.
Obviously, there was no one else running in front of Bellamy. He’s alone?
Bellamy was still on his chest, breathing heavily, his legs and ankles all tangled with hardened plastic. The
agent walked over and used his foot to roll the old man over onto his back.
“Where is he?!” the agent demanded.
Bellamy’s lip was bleeding from the fall. “Where is who?”
Agent Simkins lifted his foot and placed his boot squarely on Bellamy’s pristine silk tie. Then he leaned in,
applying some pressure. “Believe me, Mr. Bellamy, you do not want to play this game with me.”
CHAPTER 59
Robert Langdon felt like a corpse.
He lay supine, hands folded on his chest, in total darkness, trapped in the most confined of spaces. Although
Katherine lay nearby in a similar position near his head, Langdon could not see her. He had his eyes closed to
prevent himself from catching even a fleeting glimpse of his frightening predicament.
The space around him was small.
Very small.
Sixty seconds ago, with the double doors of the reading room crashing down, he and Katherine had followed
Bellamy into the octagonal console, down a steep set of stairs, and into the unexpected space below.
Langdon had realized at once where they were. The heart of the library’s circulation system. Resembling a
small airport baggage distribution center, the circulation room had numerous conveyor belts that angled off
in different directions. Because the Library of Congress was housed in three separate buildings, books
requested in the reading room often had to be transported great distances by a system of conveyors through a
web of underground tunnels.
Bellamy immediately crossed the room to a steel door, where he inserted his key card, typed a sequence of
buttons, and pushed open the door. The space beyond was dark, but as the door opened, a span of motionsensor
lights flickered to life.
When Langdon saw what lay beyond, he realized he was looking at something few people ever saw. The
Library of Congress stacks. He felt encouraged by Bellamy’s plan. What better place to hide than in a giant
labyrinth?
Bellamy did not guide them into the stacks, however. Instead, he propped the door open with a book and
turned back to face them. “I had hoped to be able to explain a lot more to you, but we have no time.” He gave
Langdon his key card. “You’ll need this.”
“You’re not coming with us?” Langdon asked.
Bellamy shook his head. “You’ll never make it unless we split up. The most important thing is to keep that
pyramid and capstone in safe hands.”
Langdon saw no other way out except the stairs back up to the reading room. “And where are you going?”
“I’ll coax them into the stacks away from you,” Bellamy said. “It’s all I can do to help you escape.”
Before Langdon could ask where he and Katherine were supposed to go, Bellamy was heaving a large crate
of books off one of the conveyors. “Lie on the belt,” Bellamy said. “Keep your hands in.”
Langdon stared. You cannot be serious! The conveyor belt extended a short distance then disappeared into a
dark hole in the wall. The opening looked large enough to permit passage of a crate of books, but not much
more. Langdon glanced back longingly at the stacks.
“Forget it,” Bellamy said. “The motion-sensor lights will make it impossible to hide.”
“Thermal signature!” a voice upstairs shouted. “Flanks converge!”
Katherine apparently had heard all she needed to hear. She climbed onto the conveyor belt with her head
only a few feet from the opening in the wall. She crossed her hands over her chest like a mummy in a
sarcophagus.
Langdon stood frozen.
“Robert,” Bellamy urged, “if you won’t do this for me, do it for Peter.”
The voices upstairs sounded closer now.
As if in a dream, Langdon moved to the conveyor. He slung his daybag onto the belt and then climbed on,
placing his head at Katherine’s feet. The hard rubber conveyor felt cold against his back. He stared at the
ceiling and felt like a hospital patient preparing for insertion headfirst into an MRI machine.
“Keep your phone on,” Bellamy said. “Someone will call soon . . . and offer help. Trust him.”
Someone will call? Langdon knew that Bellamy had been trying to reach someone with no luck and had left a
message earlier. And only moments ago, as they hurried down the spiral staircase, Bellamy had tried one last
time and gotten through, speaking very briefly in hushed tones and then hanging up.
“Follow the conveyor to the end,” Bellamy said. “And jump off quickly before you circle back. Use my key
card to get out.”
“Get out of where?!” Langdon demanded.
But Bellamy was already pulling levers. All the different conveyors in the room hummed to life. Langdon
felt himself jolt into motion, and the ceiling began moving overhead.
God save me.
As Langdon approached the opening in the wall, he looked back and saw Warren Bellamy race through the
doorway into the stacks, closing the door behind him. An instant later, Langdon slid into the darkness,
swallowed up by the library . . . just as a glowing red laser dot came dancing down the stairs.
CHAPTER 60
The underpaid female security guard from Preferred Security double-checked the Kalorama Heights address
on her call sheet. This is it? The gated driveway before her belonged to one of the neighborhood’s largest and
quietest estates, and so it seemed odd that 911 had just received an urgent call about it.
As usual with unconfirmed call-ins, 911 had contacted the local alarm company before bothering the police.
The guard often thought the alarm company’s motto—“Your first line of defense”—could just as easily have
been “False alarms, pranks, lost pets, and complaints from wacky neighbors.”
Tonight, as usual, the guard had arrived with no details about the specific concern. Above my pay grade. Her
job was simply to show up with her yellow bubble light spinning, assess the property, and report anything
unusual. Normally, something innocuous had tripped the house alarm, and she would use her override keys
to reset it. This house, however, was silent. No alarm. From the road, everything looked dark and peaceful.
The guard buzzed the intercom at the gate, but got no answer. She typed her override code to open the gate
and pulled into the driveway. Leaving her engine running and her bubble light spinning, she walked up to the
front door and rang the bell. No answer. She saw no lights and no movement.
Reluctantly following procedure, she flicked on her flashlight to begin her trek around the house to check the
doors and windows for signs of break-in. As she rounded the corner, a black stretch limousine drove past the
house, slowing for a moment before continuing on. Rubbernecking neighbors.
Bit by bit, she made her way around the house, but saw nothing out of place. The house was bigger than she
had imagined, and by the time she reached the backyard, she was shivering from the cold. Obviously there
was nobody home.
“Dispatch?” she called in on her radio. “I’m on the Kalorama Heights call? Owners aren’t home. No signs of
trouble. Finished the perimeter check. No indication of an intruder. False alarm.”
“Roger that,” the dispatcher replied. “Have a good night.”
The guard put her radio back on her belt and began retracing her steps, eager to get back to the warmth of her
vehicle. As she did so, however, she spotted something she had missed earlier—a tiny speck of bluish light
on the back of the house.
Puzzled, she walked over to it, now seeing the source—a low transom window, apparently to the home’s
basement. The glass of the window had been blacked out, coated on the inside with an opaque paint. Some
kind of darkroom maybe? The bluish glow she had seen was emanating through a tiny spot on the window
where the black paint had started to peel.
She crouched down, trying to peer through, but she couldn’t see much through the tiny opening. She tapped
on the glass, wondering if maybe someone was working down there.
“Hello?” she shouted.
There was no answer, but as she knocked on the window, the paint chip suddenly detached and fell off,
affording her a more complete view. She leaned in, nearly pressing her face to the window as she scanned the
basement. Instantly, she wished she hadn’t.
What in the name of God?!
Transfixed, she remained crouched there for a moment, staring in abject horror at the scene before her.
Finally, trembling, the guard groped for the radio on her belt.
She never found it.
A sizzling pair of Taser prongs slammed into the back of her neck, and a searing pain shot through her body.
Her muscles seized, and she pitched forward, unable even to close her eyes before her face hit the cold
ground.
CHAPTER 61
Tonight was not the first time Warren Bellamy had been blindfolded. Like all of his Masonic brothers, he
had worn the ritual “hoodwink” during his ascent to the upper echelons of Masonry. That, however, had
taken place among trusted friends. Tonight was different. These rough-handed men had bound him, placed a
bag on his head, and were now marching him through the library stacks.
The agents had physically threatened Bellamy and demanded to know the whereabouts of Robert Langdon.
Knowing his aging body couldn’t take much punishment, Bellamy had told his lie quickly.
“Langdon never came down here with me!” he had said, gasping for air. “I told him to go up to the balcony
and hide behind the Moses statue, but I don’t know where he is now!” The story apparently had been
convincing, because two of the agents had run off in pursuit. Now the remaining two agents were marching
him in silence through the stacks.
Bellamy’s only solace was in knowing Langdon and Katherine were whisking the pyramid off to safety.
Soon Langdon would be contacted by a man who could offer sanctuary. Trust him. The man Bellamy had
called knew a great deal about the Masonic Pyramid and the secret it held—the location of a hidden spiral
staircase that led down into the earth to the hiding place of potent ancient wisdom buried long ago. Bellamy
had finally gotten through to the man as they were escaping the reading room, and he felt confident that his
short message would be understood perfectly.
Now, as he moved in total darkness, Bellamy pictured the stone pyramid and golden capstone in Langdon’s
bag. It has been many years since those two pieces were in the same room.
Bellamy would never forget that painful night. The first of many for Peter. Bellamy had been asked to come
to the Solomon estate in Potomac for Zachary Solomon’s eighteenth birthday. Zachary, despite being a
rebellious child, was a Solomon, which meant tonight, following family tradition, he would receive his
inheritance. Bellamy was one of Peter’s dearest friends and a trusted Masonic brother, and therefore was
asked to attend as a witness. But it was not only the transference of money that Bellamy had been asked to
witness. There was far more than money at stake tonight.
Bellamy had arrived early and waited, as requested, in Peter’s private study. The wonderful old room smelled
of leather, wood fires, and loose-leaf tea. Warren was seated when Peter led his son, Zachary, into the room.
When the scrawny eighteen-year-old saw Bellamy, he frowned. “What are you doing here?”
“Bearing witness,” Bellamy offered. “Happy birthday, Zachary.”
The boy mumbled and looked away.
“Sit down, Zach,” Peter said.
Zachary sat in the solitary chair facing his father’s huge wooden desk. Solomon bolted the study door.
Bellamy took a seat off to one side.
Solomon addressed Zachary in a serious tone. “Do you know why you’re here?”
“I think so,” Zachary said.
Solomon sighed deeply. “I know you and I have not seen eye to eye for quite some time, Zach. I’ve done my
best to be a good father and to prepare you for this moment.”
Zachary said nothing.
“As you know, every Solomon child, upon reaching adulthood, is presented with his or her birthright—a
share of the Solomon fortune—which is intended to be a seed . . . a seed for you to nurture, make grow, and
use to help nourish mankind.”
Solomon walked to a vault in the wall, unlocked it, and removed a large black folder. “Son, this portfolio
contains everything you need to legally transfer your financial inheritance into your own name.” He laid it on
the desk. “The aim is that you use this money to build a life of productivity, prosperity, and philanthropy.”
Zachary reached for the folder. “Thanks.”
“Hold on,” his father said, putting his hand on the portfolio. “There’s something else I need to explain.”
Zachary shot his father a contemptuous look and slumped back down.
“There are aspects of the Solomon inheritance of which you are not yet aware.” His father was staring
straight into Zachary’s eyes now. “You are my firstborn, Zachary, which means you are entitled to a choice.”
The teenager sat up, looking intrigued.
“It is a choice that may well determine the direction of your future, and so I urge you to ponder it carefully.”
“What choice?”
His father took a deep breath. “It is the choice . . . between wealth or wisdom.”
Zachary gave him a blank stare. “Wealth or wisdom? I don’t get it.”
Solomon stood, walking again to the vault, where he pulled out a heavy stone pyramid with Masonic
symbols carved into it. Peter heaved the stone onto the desk beside the portfolio. “This pyramid was created
long ago and has been entrusted to our family for generations.”
“A pyramid?” Zachary didn’t look very excited.
“Son, this pyramid is a map . . . a map that reveals the location of one of humankind’s greatest lost treasures.
This map was created so that the treasure could one day be rediscovered.” Peter’s voice swelled now with
pride. “And tonight, following tradition, I am able to offer it to you . . . under certain conditions.”
Zachary eyed the pyramid suspiciously. “What’s the treasure?”
Bellamy could tell that this coarse question was not what Peter had hoped for. Nonetheless, his demeanor
remained steady.
“Zachary, it’s hard to explain without a lot of background. But this treasure . . . in essence . . . is something
we call the Ancient Mysteries.”
Zachary laughed, apparently thinking his father was joking.
Bellamy could see the melancholy growing now in Peter’s eyes.
“This is very difficult for me to describe, Zach. Traditionally, by the time a Solomon is eighteen years of age,
he is about to embark on his years of higher education in—”
“I told you!” Zachary fired back. “I’m not interested in college!”
“I don’t mean college,” his father said, his voice still calm and quiet. “I’m talking about the brotherhood of
Freemasonry. I’m talking about an education in the enduring mysteries of human science. If you had plans to
join me within their ranks, you would be on the verge of receiving the education necessary to understand the
importance of your decision tonight.”
Zachary rolled his eyes. “Spare me the Masonic lecture again. I know I’m the first Solomon who doesn’t
want to join. But so what? Don’t you get it? I have no interest in playing dress-up with a bunch of old men!”
His father was silent for a long time, and Bellamy noticed the fine age lines that had started to appear around
Peter’s still-youthful eyes.
“Yes, I get it,” Peter finally said. “Times are different now. I understand that Masonry probably appears
strange to you, or maybe even boring. But I want you to know, that doorway will always be open for you
should you change your mind.”
“Don’t hold your breath,” Zach grumbled.
“That’s enough!” Peter snapped, standing up. “I realize life has been a struggle for you, Zachary, but I am
not your only guidepost. There are good men waiting for you, men who will welcome you within the
Masonic fold and show you your true potential.”
Zachary chuckled and glanced over at Bellamy. “Is that why you’re here, Mr. Bellamy? So you Masons can
gang up on me?”
Bellamy said nothing, instead directing a respectful gaze back at Peter Solomon—a reminder to Zachary of
who held the power in this room.
Zachary turned back to his father.
“Zach,” Peter said, “we’re getting nowhere . . . so let me just tell you this. Whether or not you comprehend
the responsibility being offered to you tonight, it is my family obligation to present it.” He motioned to the
pyramid. “It is a rare privilege to guard this pyramid. I urge you to consider this opportunity for a few days
before making your decision.”
“Opportunity?” Zachary said. “Babysitting a rock?”
“There are great mysteries in this world, Zach,” Peter said with a sigh. “Secrets that transcend your wildest
imagination. This pyramid protects those secrets. And even more important, there will come a time, probably
within your lifetime, when this pyramid will at last be deciphered and its secrets unearthed. It will be a
moment of great human transformation . . . and you have a chance to play a role in that moment. I want you
to consider it very carefully. Wealth is commonplace, but wisdom is rare.” He motioned to the portfolio and
then to the pyramid. “I beg you to remember that wealth without wisdom can often end in disaster.”
Zachary looked like he thought his father was insane. “Whatever you say, Dad, but there’s no way I’m giving
up my inheritance for this.” He gestured to the pyramid.
Peter folded his hands before him. “If you choose to accept the responsibility, I will hold your money and the
pyramid for you until you have successfully completed your education within the Masons. This will take
years, but you will emerge with the maturity to receive both your money and this pyramid. Wealth and
wisdom. A potent combination.”
Zachary shot up. “Jesus, Dad! You don’t give up, do you? Can’t you see that I don’t give a damn about the
Masons or stone pyramids and ancient mysteries?” He reached down and scooped up the black portfolio,
waving it in front of his father’s face. “This is my birthright! The same birthright of the Solomons who came
before me! I can’t believe you’d try to trick me out of my inheritance with lame stories about ancient treasure
maps!” He tucked the portfolio under his arm and marched past Bellamy to the study’s patio door.
“Zachary, wait!” His father rushed after him as Zachary stalked out into the night. “Whatever you do, you
can never speak of the pyramid you have seen!” Peter Solomon’s voice cracked. “Not to anyone! Ever!”
But Zachary ignored him, disappearing into the night.
Peter Solomon’s gray eyes were filled with pain as he returned to his desk and sat heavily in his leather chair.
After a long silence, he looked up at Bellamy and forced a sad smile. “That went well.”
Bellamy sighed, sharing in Solomon’s pain. “Peter, I don’t mean to sound insensitive . . . but . . . do you trust
him?”
Solomon stared blankly into space.
“I mean . . .” Bellamy pressed, “not to say anything about the pyramid?”
Solomon’s face was blank. “I really don’t know what to say, Warren. I’m not sure I even know him
anymore.”
Bellamy rose and walked slowly back and forth before the large desk. “Peter, you have followed your family
duty, but now, considering what just happened, I think we need to take precautions. I should return the
capstone to you so you can find a new home for it. Someone else should watch over it.”
“Why?” Solomon asked.
“If Zachary tells anyone about the pyramid . . . and mentions my being present tonight . . .”
“He knows nothing of the capstone, and he’s too immature to know the pyramid has any significance. We
don’t need a new home for it. I’ll keep the pyramid in my vault. And you will keep the capstone wherever
you keep it. As we always have.”
It was six years later, on Christmas Day, with the family still healing from Zachary’s death, that the
enormous man claiming to have killed him in prison broke into the Solomon estate. The intruder had come
for the pyramid, but he had taken with him only Isabel Solomon’s life.
Days later, Peter summoned Bellamy to his office. He locked the door and took the pyramid out of his vault,
setting it on the desk between them. “I should have listened to you.”
Bellamy knew Peter was racked with guilt over this. “It wouldn’t have mattered.”
Solomon drew a tired breath. “Did you bring the capstone?”
Bellamy pulled a small cube-shaped package from his pocket. The faded brown paper was tied with twine
and bore a wax seal of Solomon’s ring. Bellamy laid the package on the desk, knowing the two halves of the
Masonic Pyramid were closer together tonight than they should be. “Find someone else to watch this. Don’t
tell me who it is.”
Solomon nodded.
“And I know where you can hide the pyramid,” Bellamy said. He told Solomon about the Capitol Building
subbasement. “There’s no place in Washington more secure.”
Bellamy recalled Solomon liking the idea right away because it felt symbolically apt to hide the pyramid in
the symbolic heart of our nation. Typical Solomon, Bellamy had thought. The idealist even in a crisis.
Now, ten years later, as Bellamy was being shoved blindly through the Library of Congress, he knew the
crisis tonight was far from over. He also now knew whom Solomon had chosen to guard the capstone . . . and
he prayed to God that Robert Langdon was up to the job.
CHAPTER 62
I’m under Second Street.
Langdon’s eyes remained tightly shut as the conveyor rumbled through the darkness toward the Adams
Building. He did his best not to picture the tons of earth overhead and the narrow tube through which he was
now traveling. He could hear Katherine breathing several yards ahead of him, but so far, she had not uttered a
word.
She’s in shock. Langdon was not looking forward to telling her about her brother’s severed hand. You have
to, Robert. She needs to know.
“Katherine?” Langdon finally said, without opening his eyes. “Are you okay?”
A tremulous, disembodied voice replied somewhere up ahead. “Robert, the pyramid you’re carrying. It’s
Peter’s, isn’t it?”
“Yes,” Langdon replied.
A long silence followed. “I think . . . that pyramid is why my mother was murdered.”
Langdon was well aware that Isabel Solomon had been murdered ten years ago, but he didn’t know the
details, and Peter had never mentioned anything about a pyramid. “What are you talking about?”
Katherine’s voice filled with emotion as she recounted the harrowing events of that night, how the tattooed
man had broken into their estate. “It was a long time ago, but I’ll never forget that he demanded a pyramid.
He said he heard about the pyramid in prison, from my nephew, Zachary . . . right before he killed him.”
Langdon listened in amazement. The tragedy within the Solomon family was almost beyond belief.
Katherine continued, telling Langdon that she had always believed the intruder was killed that night . . . that
is, until this same man had resurfaced today, posing as Peter’s psychiatrist and luring Katherine to his home.
“He knew private things about my brother, my mother’s death, and even my work,” she said anxiously,
“things he could only have learned from my brother. And so I trusted him . . . and that’s how he got inside
the Smithsonian Museum Support Center.” Katherine took a deep breath and told Langdon she was nearly
certain the man had destroyed her lab tonight.
Langdon listened in utter shock. For several moments, the two of them lay together in silence on the moving
conveyor. Langdon knew he had an obligation to share with Katherine the rest of tonight’s terrible news. He
began slowly, and as gently as he possibly could he told her how her brother had entrusted him with a small
package years earlier, how Langdon had been tricked into bringing this package to Washington tonight, and
finally, about her brother’s hand having been found in the Rotunda of the Capitol Building.
Katherine’s reaction was deafening silence.
Langdon could tell she was reeling, and he wished he could reach out and comfort her, but lying end to end
in the narrow blackness made it impossible. “Peter’s okay,” he whispered. “He’s alive, and we’ll get him
back.” Langdon tried to give her hope. “Katherine, his captor promised me your brother would be returned
alive . . . as long as I decipher the pyramid for him.”
Still Katherine said nothing.
Langdon kept talking. He told her about the stone pyramid, its Masonic cipher, the sealed capstone, and, of
course, about Bellamy’s claims that this pyramid was in fact the Masonic Pyramid of legend . . . a map that
revealed the hiding place of a long spiral staircase that led deep into the earth . . . down hundreds of feet to a
mystical ancient treasure that had been buried in Washington long ago.
Katherine finally spoke, but her voice was flat and emotionless. “Robert, open your eyes.”
Open my eyes? Langdon had no desire to have even the slightest glimpse of how cramped this space really
was.
“Robert!” Katherine demanded, urgently now. “Open your eyes! We’re here!”
Langdon’s eyes flew open as his body emerged through an opening similar to the one it had entered at the
other end. Katherine was already climbing off the conveyor belt. She lifted his daybag off the belt as
Langdon swung his legs over the edge and jumped down onto the tile floor just in time, before the conveyor
turned the corner and headed back the way it came. The space around them was a circulation room much like
the one they had come from in the other building. A small sign read ADAMS BUILDING:
CIRCULATION ROOM 3.
Langdon felt like he had just emerged from some kind of subterranean
birth canal. Born again. He turned immediately to Katherine. “Are you okay?”
Her eyes were red, and she had obviously been crying, but she nodded with a resolute stoicism. She picked
up Langdon’s daybag and carried it across the room without a word, setting it on a cluttered desk. She lit the
desk’s halogen clamp lamp, unzipped the bag, folded down the sides, and peered inside.
The granite pyramid looked almost austere in the clean halogen light. Katherine ran her fingers over the
engraved Masonic cipher, and Langdon sensed deep emotion churning within her. Slowly, she reached into
the daybag and pulled out the cube-shaped package. She held it under the light, examining it closely.
“As you can see,” Langdon quietly said, “the wax seal is embossed with Peter’s Masonic ring. He said this
ring was used to seal the package more than a century ago.”
Katherine said nothing.
“When your brother entrusted the package to me,” Langdon told her, “he said it would give me the power to
create order out of chaos. I’m not entirely sure what that means, but I’ve got to assume the capstone reveals
something important, because Peter was insistent that it not fall into the wrong hands. Mr. Bellamy just told
me the same thing, urging me to hide the pyramid and not let anyone open the package.”
Katherine turned now, looking angry. “Bellamy told you not to open the package?”
“Yes. He was adamant.”
Katherine looked incredulous. “But you said this capstone is the only way we can decipher the pyramid,
right?”
“Probably, yes.”
Katherine’s voice was rising now. “And you said deciphering the pyramid is what you were told to do. It’s
the only way we can get Peter back, right?”
Langdon nodded.
“Then, Robert, why wouldn’t we open the package and decipher this thing right now?!”
Langdon didn’t know how to respond. “Katherine, I had the same exact reaction, and yet Bellamy told me
that keeping this pyramid’s secret intact was more important than anything . . . including your brother’s life.”
Katherine’s pretty features hardened, and she tucked a wisp of hair behind her ears. When she spoke, her
voice was resolved. “This stone
pyramid, whatever it is, has cost me my entire family. First my nephew, Zachary, then my mother, and now
my brother.And let’s face it, Robert, if you hadn’t called tonight to warn me . . .”
Langdon could feel himself trapped between Katherine’s logic and Bellamy’s steadfast urging.
“I may be a scientist,” she said, “but I also come from a family of well-known Masons. Believe me, I’ve
heard all the stories about the Masonic Pyramid and its promise of some great treasure that will enlighten
mankind. Honestly, I find it hard to imagine such a thing exists. However, if it does exist . . . perhaps it’s
time to unveil it.” Katherine slid a finger beneath the old twine on the package.
Langdon jumped. “Katherine, no! Wait!”
She paused, but her finger remained beneath the string. “Robert, I’m not going to let my brother die for this.
Whatever this capstone says . . . whatever lost treasures this engraving might reveal . . . those secrets end
tonight.”
With that, Katherine yanked defiantly on the twine, and the brittle wax seal exploded.
CHAPTER 63
In a quiet neighborhood just west of Embassy Row in Washington, there exists a medieval-style walled
garden whose roses, it is said, spring from twelfth-century plants. The garden’s Carderock gazebo—known
as Shadow House—sits elegantly amid meandering pathways of stones dug from George Washington’s
private quarry.
Tonight the silence of the gardens was broken by a young man who rushed through the wooden gate,
shouting as he came.
“Hello?” he called out, straining to see in the moonlight. “Are you in here?”
The voice that replied was frail, barely audible. “In the gazebo . . . just taking some air.”
The young man found his withered superior seated on the stone bench beneath a blanket. The hunched old
man was tiny, with elfin features. The years had bent him in two and stolen his eyesight, but his soul
remained a force to be reckoned with.
Catching his breath, the young man told him, “I just . . . took a call . . . from your friend . . . Warren
Bellamy.”
“Oh?” The old man perked up. “About what?”
“He didn’t say, but he sounded like he was in a big hurry. He told me he left you a message on your voice
mail, which you need to listen to right away.”
“That’s all he said?”
“Not quite.” The young man paused. “He told me to ask you a question.” A very strange question. “He said
he needed your response right away.”
The old man leaned closer. “What question?”
As the young man spoke Mr. Bellamy’s question, the pall that crossed the old man’s face was visible even in
the moonlight. Immediately, he threw off his blanket and began struggling to his feet.
“Please help me inside. Right away.”
CHAPTER 64
No more secrets, thought Katherine Solomon.
On the table in front of her, the wax seal that had been intact for generations now lay in pieces. She finished
removing the faded brown paper from her brother’s precious package. Beside her, Langdon looked decidedly
uneasy.
From within the paper, Katherine extracted a small box made of gray stone. Resembling a polished granite
cube, the box had no hinges, no latch, and no apparent way inside. It reminded Katherine of a Chinese puzzle
box.
“It looks like a solid block,” she said, running her fingers over the edges. “Are you sure the X-ray showed it
was hollow? With a capstone inside?”
“It did,” Langdon said, moving next to Katherine and scrutinizing the mysterious box. He and Katherine
peered at the box from different angles, attempting to find a way in.
“Got it,” Katherine said as her fingernail located the hidden slit along one of the box’s top edges. She set the
box down on the desk and then carefully pried open the lid, which rose smoothly, like the top of a fine
jewelry box.
When the lid fell back, Langdon and Katherine both drew audible breaths. The interior of the box seemed to
be glowing. The inside was shining with an almost supernatural effulgence. Katherine had never seen a piece
of gold this large, and it took her an instant to realize that the precious metal was simply reflecting the
radiance of the desk lamp.
“It’s spectacular,” she whispered. Despite being sealed in a dark stone cube for over a century, the capstone
had not faded or tarnished in any way. Gold resists the entropic laws of decay; that’s one of the reasons the
ancients considered it magical. Katherine felt her pulse quicken as she leaned forward, peering down over
the small golden point. “There’s an inscription.”
Langdon moved closer, their shoulders now touching. His blue eyes flashed with curiosity. He had told
Katherine about the ancient Greek practice of creating a symbolon—a code broken into parts—and how this
capstone, long separated from the pyramid itself, would hold the key to deciphering the pyramid. Allegedly,
this inscription, whatever it said, would bring order from this chaos.
Katherine held the little box up to the light and peered straight down over the capstone.
Though small, the inscription was perfectly visible—a small bit of elegantly engraved text on the face of one
side. Katherine read the six simple words.
Then she read them again.
“No!” she declared. “That can’t be what it says!”
Across the street, Director Sato hurried up the long walkway outside the Capitol Building toward her
rendezvous point on First Street. The update from her field team had been unacceptable. No Langdon. No
pyramid. No capstone. Bellamy was in custody, but he was not telling them the truth. At least not yet.
I’ll make him talk.
She glanced back over her shoulder at one of Washington’s newest vistas—the Capitol Dome framed above
the new visitor center. The illuminated dome only accentuated the significance of what was truly at stake
tonight. Dangerous times.
Sato was relieved to hear her cell phone ring and see her analyst’s ID on the screen.
“Nola,” Sato answered. “What have you got?”
Nola Kaye gave her the bad news. The X-ray of the capstone’s inscription was too faint to read, and the
image-enhancing filters had not helped. Shit. Sato chewed at her lip. “How about the sixteen-letter grid?”
“I’m still trying,” Nola said, “but so far I’ve found no secondary encryption scheme that’s applicable. I’ve
got a computer reshuffling the letters in the grid and looking for anything identifiable, but there are over
twenty trillion possibilities.”
“Stay on it. Let me know.” Sato hung up, scowling. Her hopes of deciphering the pyramid using only a
photograph and X-ray were fading fast. I need that pyramid and capstone . . . and I’m running out of time.
Sato arrived at First Street just as a black Escalade SUV with dark windows roared across the double yellow
and skidded to a stop in front of her at their rendezvous point. A lone agent got out.
“Any word yet on Langdon?” Sato demanded.
“Confidence is high,” the man said, emotionless. “Backup just arrived. All library exits are surrounded. We
even have air support coming in. We’ll flush him with tear gas, and he’ll have nowhere to run.”
“And Bellamy?”
“Tied up in the backseat.”
Good. Her shoulder was still smarting.
The agent handed Sato a plastic Ziploc bag containing cell phone, keys, and wallet. “Bellamy’s effects.”
“Nothing else?”
“No, ma’am. The pyramid and package must still be with Langdon.”
“Okay,” Sato said. “Bellamy knows plenty he’s not telling. I’d like to question him personally.”
“Yes, ma’am. To Langley, then?”
Sato took a deep breath and paced a moment beside the SUV. Strict protocols governed the interrogation of
U.S. civilians, and questioning Bellamy was highly illegal unless it was done at Langley on video with
witnesses, attorneys, blah, blah, blah . . . “Not Langley,” she said, trying to think of somewhere closer. And
more private.
The agent said nothing, standing at attention beside the idling SUV, waiting for orders.
Sato lit a cigarette, took a long drag, and gazed down at the Ziploc bag of Bellamy’s items. His key ring, she
had noticed, included an electronic fob adorned with four letters—USBG. Sato knew, of course, which
government building this fob accessed. The building was very close and, at this hour, very private.
She smiled and pocketed the fob. Perfect.
When she told the agent where she wanted to take Bellamy, she expected the man to look surprised, but he
simply nodded and opened the passenger door for her, his cold stare revealing nothing.
Sato loved professionals.
Langdon stood in the basement of the Adams Building and stared in disbelief at the elegantly inscribed
words on the face of the golden capstone.
That’s all it says?
Beside him, Katherine held the capstone under the light and shook her head. “There’s got to be more,” she
insisted, sounding cheated. “This is what my brother has been protecting all these years?”
Langdon had to admit he was mystified. According to Peter and Bellamy, this capstone was supposed to help
them decipher the stone pyramid. In light of those claims, Langdon had expected something illuminating and
helpful. More like obvious and useless. Once again, he read the six words delicately inscribed on the face of
the capstone.
The
secret hides
within The Order
The secret hides within The Order?
At first glance, the inscription appeared to be stating the obvious—that the letters on the pyramid were out of
“order” and that their secret lay in finding their proper sequence. This reading, however, in addition to being
self-evident, seemed unlikely for another reason. “The words the and order are capitalized,” Langdon said.
Katherine nodded blankly. “I saw that.”
The secret hides within The Order. Langdon could think of only one logical implication. “ ‘The Order’ must
be referencing the Masonic Order.”
“I agree,” Katherine said, “but it’s still no help. It tells us nothing.”
Langdon had to concur. After all, the entire story of the Masonic Pyramid revolved around a secret hidden
within the Masonic Order.
“Robert, didn’t my brother tell you this capstone would give you power to see order where others saw only
chaos?”
He nodded in frustration. For the second time tonight, Robert Langdon was feeling unworthy.
CHAPTER 65
Once Mal’akh had finished dealing with his unexpected visitor—a female security guard from Preferred
Security—he fixed the paint on the window through which she had glimpsed his sacred work space.
Now, ascending out of the soft blue haze of the basement, he emerged through a hidden doorway into his
living room. Inside, he paused, admiring his spectacular painting of the Three Graces and savoring the
familiar smells and sounds of his home.
Soon I will be leaving forever. Mal’akh knew that after tonight he would be unable to return to this place.
After tonight, he thought, smiling, I will have no need for this place.
He wondered if Robert Langdon yet understood the true power of the pyramid . . . or the importance of the
role for which fate had chosen him. Langdon has yet to call me, Mal’akh thought, after double-checking for
messages on his disposable phone. It was now 10:02 P.M. He has less than two hours.
Mal’akh went upstairs to his Italian-marble bathroom and turned on the steam shower to let it heat up.
Methodically, he stripped off his clothes, eager to begin his cleansing ritual.
He drank two glasses of water to calm his starving stomach. Then he walked to the full-length mirror and
studied his naked body. His two days of fasting had accentuated his musculature, and he could not help but
admire that which he had become. By dawn, I will be so much more.
CHAPTER 66
“We should get out of here,” Langdon said to Katherine. “It’s only a matter of time before they figure out
where we are.” He hoped Bellamy had managed to escape.
Katherine still seemed fixated on the gold capstone, looking incredulous that the inscription was so
unhelpful. She had taken the capstone out of the box, examined every side, and was now carefully putting it
back in the box.
The secret hides within The Order, Langdon thought. Big help.
Langdon found himself wondering now if perhaps Peter had been misinformed about the contents of the box.
This pyramid and capstone had been created long before Peter was born, and Peter was simply doing as his
forefathers had told him, keeping a secret that was probably as much a mystery to him as it was to Langdon
and Katherine.
What did I expect? Langdon wondered. The more he learned tonight about the Legend of the Masonic
Pyramid, the less plausible it all seemed. I’m searching for a hidden spiral staircase covered by a huge
stone? Something told Langdon he was chasing shadows. Nonetheless, deciphering this pyramid seemed his
best chance at saving Peter.
“Robert, does the year 1514 mean anything to you?”
Fifteen-fourteen? The question seemed apropos of nothing. Langdon shrugged. “No. Why?”
Katherine handed him the stone box. “Look. The box is dated. Have a look under the light.”
Langdon took a seat at the desk and studied the cube-shaped box beneath the light. Katherine put a soft hand
on his shoulder, leaning in to point out the tiny text she had found carved on the exterior of the box, near the
bottom corner of one side.
“Fifteen-fourteen A.D.,” she said, pointing into the box.
Sure enough, the carving depicted the number 1514, followed by an unusual stylization of the letters A and
D.
“This date,” Katherine was saying, sounding suddenly hopeful, “maybe it’s the link we’re missing? This
dated cube looks a lot like a Masonic cornerstone, so maybe it’s pointing to a real cornerstone? Maybe to a
building built in 1514 A.D.?”
Langdon barely heard her.
Fifteen-fourteen A.D. is not a date.
The symbol , as any scholar of medieval art would recognize, was a well-known symbature—a symbol
used in place of a signature. Many of the early philosophers, artists, and authors signed their work with their
own unique symbol or monogram rather than their name. This practice added a mysterious allure to their
work and also protected them from persecution should their writings or artwork be deemed
counterestablishment.
In the case of this symbature, the letters A.D. did not stand for Anno Domini . . . they were German for
something else entirely.
Langdon instantly saw all the pieces fall into place. Within seconds, he was certain he knew exactly how to
decipher the pyramid. “Katherine, you did it,” he said, packing up. “That’s all we needed. Let’s go. I’ll
explain on the way.”
Katherine looked amazed. “The date 1514 A.D. actually means something to you?”
Langdon winked at her and headed for the door. “A.D. isn’t a date, Katherine. It’s a person.”
CHAPTER 67
West of Embassy Row, all was silent again inside the walled garden with its twelfth-century roses and
Shadow House gazebo. On the other side of an entry road, the young man was helping his hunched superior
walk across an expansive lawn.
He’s letting me guide him?
Normally, the blind old man refused help, preferring to navigate by memory alone while on the grounds of
his sanctuary. Tonight, however, he was apparently in a hurry to get inside and return Warren Bellamy’s
phone call.
“Thank you,” the old man said as they entered the building that held his private study. “I can find my way
from here.”
“Sir, I would be happy to stay and help—”
“That’s all for tonight,” he said, letting go of his helper’s arm and shuffling hurriedly off into the darkness.
“Good night.”
The young man exited the building and walked back across the great lawn to his modest dwelling on the
grounds. By the time he entered his flat, he could feel his curiosity gnawing at him. The old man clearly had
been upset by the question posed by Mr. Bellamy . . . and yet the question had seemed strange, almost
meaningless.
Is there no help for the widow’s son?
In his wildest imagination, he could not guess what this could mean. Puzzled, he went to his computer and
typed in a search for this precise phrase.
To his great surprise, page after page of references appeared, all citing this exact question. He read the
information in wonderment. It seemed Warren Bellamy was not the first person in history to ask this strange
question. These same words had been uttered centuries ago . . . by King Solomon as he mourned a murdered
friend. The question was allegedly still spoken today by Masons, who used it as a kind of encoded cry for
help. Warren Bellamy, it seemed, was sending a distress call to a fellow Mason.
CHAPTER 68
Albrecht Dürer?
Katherine was trying to put the pieces together as she hurried with Langdon through the basement of the
Adams Building. A.D. stands for Albrecht Dürer? The famous sixteenth-century German engraver and
painter was one of her brother’s favorite artists, and Katherine was vaguely familiar with his work. Even so,
she could not imagine how Dürer would be any help to them in this case. For one thing, he’s been dead more
than four hundred years.
“Dürer is symbolically perfect,” Langdon was saying as they followed the trail of illuminated EXIT signs.
“He was the ultimate Renaissance mind—artist, philosopher, alchemist, and a lifelong student of the Ancient
Mysteries. To this day, nobody fully understands the messages hidden in Dürer’s art.”
“That may be true,” she said. “But how does ‘1514 Albrecht Dürer’ explain how to decipher the pyramid?”
They reached a locked door, and Langdon used Bellamy’s key card to get through.
“The number 1514,” Langdon said as they hurried up the stairs, “is pointing us to a very specific piece of
Dürer’s work.” They came into a huge corridor. Langdon glanced around and then pointed left. “This way.”
They moved quickly again. “Albrecht Dürer actually hid the number 1514 in his most mysterious piece of
art—Melencolia I—which he completed in the year 1514. It’s considered the seminal work of the Northern
European Renaissance.”
Peter had once shown Katherine Melencolia I in an old book on ancient mysticism, but she didn’t recall any
hidden number 1514.
“As you may know,” Langdon said, sounding excited, “Melencolia I depicts mankind’s struggle to
comprehend the Ancient Mysteries. The symbolism in Melencolia I is so complex it makes Leonardo da
Vinci look overt.”
Katherine stopped abruptly and looked at Langdon. “Robert, Melencolia I is here in Washington. It hangs in
the National Gallery.”
“Yes,” he said with a smile, “and something tells me that’s not a coincidence. The gallery is closed at this
hour, but I know the curator and—”
“Forget it, Robert, I know what happens when you go to museums.” Katherine headed off into a nearby
alcove, where she saw a desk with a computer.
Langdon followed, looking unhappy.
“Let’s do this the easier way.” It seemed Professor Langdon, the art connoisseur, was having an ethical
dilemma about using the Internet when an original was so nearby. Katherine stepped behind the desk and
powered up the computer. When the machine finally came to life, she realized she had another problem.
“There’s no icon for a browser.”
“It’s an internal library network.” Langdon pointed to an icon on the desktop. “Try that.”
Katherine clicked on the icon marked DIGITAL COLLECTIONS. The computer accessed a new screen,
and Langdon pointed again. Katherine clicked on his choice of icon: FINE PRINTS COLLECTION. The
screen refreshed. FINE PRINTS: SEARCH.
“Type in ‘Albrecht Dürer.’ ”
Katherine entered the name and then clicked the search key. Within seconds, the screen began displaying a
series of thumbnail images. All of the images looked to be similar in style—intricate black-and-white
engravings. Dürer had apparently done dozens of similar engravings.
Katherine scanned the alphabetical list of his artwork.
Adam and Eve
Betrayal of Christ
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse
Great Passion
Last Supper
Seeing all the biblical titles, Katherine recalled that Dürer practiced something called Mystic Christianity—a
fusion of early Christianity, alchemy, astrology, and science.
Science . . .
The image of her lab in flames rushed through her mind. She could barely process the long-term
ramifications, but for the moment, her thoughts turned to her assistant, Trish. I hope she made it out.
Langdon was saying something about Dürer’s version of the Last Supper, but Katherine was barely listening.
She had just seen the link for Melencolia I.
She clicked the mouse, and the page refreshed with general information.
Melencolia I, 1514
Albrecht Dürer
(engraving on laid paper)
Rosenwald Collection
National Gallery of Art
Washington, D.C.
When she scrolled down, a high-res digital image of Dürer’s masterpiece appeared in all its glory.
Katherine stared in bewilderment, having forgotten just how strange it was.
Langdon gave an understanding chuckle. “As I said, it’s cryptic.”
Melencolia I consisted of a brooding figure with giant wings, seated in front of a stone building, surrounded
by the most disparate and bizarre collection of objects imaginable—measuring scales, an emaciated dog,
carpenter’s tools, an hourglass, various geometric solids, a hanging bell, a putto, a blade, a ladder.
Katherine vaguely recalled her brother telling her that the winged figure was a representation of “human
genius”—a great thinker with chin in hand, looking depressed, still unable to achieve enlightenment. The
genius is surrounded with all of the symbols of his human intellect—objects of science, math, philosophy,
nature, geometry, even carpentry—and yet is still unable to climb the ladder to true enlightenment. Even the
human genius has difficulty comprehending the Ancient Mysteries.
“Symbolically,” Langdon said, “this represents mankind’s failed attempt to transform human intellect into
godlike power. In alchemical terms, it represents our inability to turn lead into gold.”
“Not a particularly encouraging message,” Katherine agreed. “So how does it help us?” She did not see the
hidden number 1514 that Langdon was talking about.
“Order from chaos,” Langdon said, flashing a lopsided grin. “Just as your brother promised.” He reached in
his pocket and pulled out the grid of letters he had written earlier from the Masonic cipher. “Right now, this
grid is meaningless.” He spread the paper out on the desk.
Katherine eyed the grid. Definitely meaningless.
“But Dürer will transform it.”
“And how might he do that?”
“Linguistic alchemy.” Langdon motioned to the computer screen. “Look carefully. Hidden in this
masterpiece is something that will make sense of our sixteen letters.” He waited. “Do you see it yet? Look
for the number 1514.”
Katherine was in no mood to play classroom. “Robert, I see nothing—an orb, a ladder, a knife, a polyhedron,
a scale? I give up.”
“Look! There in the background. Carved into that building behind the angel? Beneath the bell? Dürer
engraved a square that is full of numbers.”
Katherine now saw the square that contained numbers, among them 1514.
“Katherine, that square is the key to deciphering the pyramid!”
She shot him a surprised look. “That’s not just any square,” Langdon said, grinning.
“That, Ms. Solomon, is a magic square.”
CHAPTER 69
Where the hell are they taking me?
Bellamy was still blindfolded in the back of an SUV. After a short stop somewhere close to the Library of
Congress, the vehicle had continued on . . . but only for a minute. Now the SUV had stopped again, having
again traveled only about a block.
Bellamy heard muffled voices talking.
“Sorry . . . impossible . . .” an authoritative voice was saying. “ . . . closed at this hour . . .”
The man driving the SUV replied with equal authority. “CIA investigation . . . national security . . .”
Apparently the exchange of words and IDs was persuasive, because the tone shifted immediately.
“Yes, of course . . . service entrance . . .” There was the loud grinding of what sounded like a garage door,
and as it opened, the voice added, “Shall I accompany you? Once you’re inside, you won’t be able to get
through—”
“No. We have access already.”
If the guard was surprised, it was too late. The SUV was moving again. It advanced about fifty yards and
then came to a stop. The heavy door rumbled closed again behind them.
Silence.
Bellamy realized he was trembling.
With a bang, the SUV’s rear hatch flew open. Bellamy felt a sharp pain in his shoulders as someone dragged
him out by his arms, then lifted him to his feet. Without a word, a powerful force led him across a wide
expanse of pavement. There was a strange, earthy smell here that he could not place. There were footsteps of
someone else walking with them, but whoever it was had yet to speak.
They stopped at a door, and Bellamy heard an electronic ping. The door clicked open. Bellamy was
manhandled through several corridors and could not help but notice that the air was warmer and more humid.
An indoor pool, maybe? No. The smell in the air was not chlorine . . . it was far more earthy and primal.
Where the hell are we?! Bellamy knew he could not be more than a block or two from the Capitol Building.
Again they stopped, and again he heard the electronic beep of a security door. This one slid open with a hiss.
As they pushed him through, the smell that hit him was unmistakable.
Bellamy now realized where they were. My God! He came here often, although never through the service
entrance. This magnificent glass building was only three hundred yards from the Capitol Building and was
technically part of the Capitol Complex. I run this place! Bellamy now realized it was his own key fob that
was giving them access.
Powerful arms pushed him through the doorway, leading him down a familiar, winding walkway. The heavy,
damp warmth of this place usually felt comforting to him. Tonight, he was sweating.
What are we doing here?!
Bellamy was halted suddenly and seated on a bench. The man with the muscles unhooked his handcuffs only
long enough to reaffix them to the bench behind his back.
“What do you want from me?” Bellamy demanded, heart pounding wildly.
The only response he received was the sound of boots walking off and the glass door sliding shut.
Then silence.
Dead silence.
They’re just going to leave me here? Bellamy was sweating more heavily now as he struggled to release his
hands. I can’t even take off my blindfold?
“Help!” he shouted. “Anybody!”
Even as he called out in panic, Bellamy knew nobody was going to hear him. This massive glass room—
known as the Jungle—was entirely airtight when the doors were closed.
They left me in the Jungle, he thought. Nobody will find me until morning.
Then he heard it.
The sound was barely audible, but it terrified Bellamy like no sound he had ever heard in his life. Something
breathing. Very close.
He was not alone on the bench.
The sudden hiss of a sulfur match sizzled so close to his face that he could feel the heat. Bellamy recoiled,
instinctively yanking hard at his chains.
Then, without warning, a hand was on his face, removing his blindfold.
The flame before him reflected in the black eyes of Inoue Sato as she pressed the match against the cigarette
dangling from her lips, only inches away from Bellamy’s face.
She glared at him in the moonlight that filtered down through the glass ceiling. She looked pleased to see his
fear.
“So, Mr. Bellamy,” Sato said, shaking out the match. “Where shall we begin?”
CHAPTER 70
A magic square. Katherine nodded as she eyed the numbered square in Dürer’s engraving. Most people
would have thought Langdon had lost his mind, but Katherine had quickly realized he was right.
The term magic square referred not to something mystical but to something mathematical—it was the name
given to a grid of consecutive numbers arranged in such a way that all the rows, columns, and diagonals
added up to the same thing. Created some four thousand years ago by mathematicians in Egypt and India,
magic squares were still believed by some to hold magical powers. Katherine had read that even nowadays
devout Indians drew special three-by-three magic squares called the Kubera Kolam on their pooja altars.
Primarily, though, modern man had relegated magic squares to the category of “recreational mathematics,”
some people still deriving pleasure from the quest to discover new “magical” configurations. Sudoku for
geniuses.
Katherine quickly analyzed Dürer’s square, adding up the numbers in several rows and columns.
“Thirty-four,” she said. “Every direction adds up to thirty-four.”
“Exactly,” Langdon said. “But did you know that this magic square is famous because Dürer accomplished
the seemingly impossible?” He quickly showed Katherine that in addition to making the rows, columns, and
diagonals add up to thirty-four, Dürer had also found a way to make the four quadrants, the four center
squares, and even the four corner squares add up to that number. “Most amazing, though, was Dürer’s ability
to position the numbers 15 and 14 together in the bottom row as an indication of the year in which he
accomplished this incredible feat!”
Katherine scanned the numbers, amazed by all the combinations.
Langdon’s tone grew more excited now. “Extraordinarily, Melencolia I represents the very first time in
history that a magic square appeared in European art. Some historians believe this was Dürer’s encoded way
of indicating that the Ancient Mysteries had traveled outside the Egyptian Mystery Schools and were now
held by the European secret societies.” Langdon paused. “Which brings us back to . . . this.”
He motioned to the slip of paper bearing the grid of letters from the stone pyramid.
“I assume the layout looks familiar now?” Langdon asked.
“Four-by-four square.”
Langdon picked up the pencil and carefully transcribed Dürer’s numbered magic square onto the slip of
paper, directly beside the lettered square. Katherine was now seeing just how easy this was going to be. He
stood poised, pencil in hand, and yet . . . strangely, after all this enthusiasm, he seemed to hesitate.
“Robert?”
He turned to her, his expression one of trepidation. “Are you sure we want to do this? Peter expressly—”
“Robert, if you don’t want to decipher this engraving, then I will.” She held out her hand for the pencil.
Langdon could tell there would be no deterring her and so he acquiesced, turning his attention back to the
pyramid. Carefully, he superimposed the magic square over the pyramid’s grid of letters and assigned each
letter a number. Then he created a new grid, placing the Masonic cipher’s letters in the new order as defined
by the sequence in Dürer’s magic square.
When Langdon was finished, they both examined the result.
Katherine immediately felt confused. “It’s still gibberish.”
Langdon remained silent a long moment. “Actually, Katherine, it’s not gibberish.” His eyes brightened again
with the thrill of discovery. “It’s . . . Latin.”
In a long, dark corridor, an old blind man shuffled as quickly as he could toward his office. When he finally
arrived, he collapsed in his desk chair, his old bones grateful for the reprieve. His answering machine was
beeping. He pressed the button and listened.
“It’s Warren Bellamy,” said the hushed whisper of his friend and Masonic brother. “I’m afraid I have
alarming news . . .”
Katherine Solomon’s eyes shot back to the grid of letters, reexamining the text. Sure enough, a Latin word
now materialized before her eyes. Jeova.
Katherine had not studied Latin, but this word was familiar from her reading of ancient Hebrew texts. Jeova.
Jehovah. As her eyes continued to trace downward, reading the grid like a book, she was surprised to realize
she could read the entire text of the pyramid.
Jeova Sanctus Unus.
She knew its meaning at once. This phrase was ubiquitous in modern translations of Hebrew scripture. In the
Torah, the God of the Hebrews was known by many names—Jeova, Jehovah, Jeshua, Yahweh, the Source,
the Elohim—but many Roman translations had consolidated the confusing nomenclature into a single Latin
phrase: Jeova Sanctus Unus.
“One true God?” she whispered to herself. The phrase certainly did not seem like something that would help
them find her brother. “That’s this pyramid’s secret message? One true God? I thought this was a map.”
Langdon looked equally perplexed, the excitement in his eyes evaporating. “This decryption obviously is
correct, but . . .”
“The man who has my brother wants to know a location.” She tucked her hair behind her ear. “This is not
going to make him very happy.”
“Katherine,” Langdon said, heaving a sigh. “I’ve been afraid of this. All night, I’ve had a feeling we’re
treating as reality a collection of myths and allegories. Maybe this inscription is pointing to a metaphorical
location—telling us that the true potential of man can be accessed only through the one true God.”
“But that makes no sense!” Katherine replied, her jaw now clenched in frustration. “My family protected this
pyramid for generations! One true God? That’s the secret? And the CIA considers this an issue of national
security? Either they’re lying or we’re missing something!”
Langdon shrugged in accord.
Just then, his phone began to ring.
In a cluttered office lined with old books, the old man hunched over his desk, clutching a phone receiver in
his arthritic hand.
The line rang and rang.
At last, a tentative voice answered. “Hello?” The voice was deep but uncertain.
The old man whispered, “I was told you require sanctuary.”
The man on the line seemed startled. “Who is this? Did Warren Bell—”
“No names, please,” the old man said. “Tell me, have you successfully protected the map that was entrusted
to you?”
A startled pause. “Yes . . . but I don’t think it matters. It doesn’t say much. If it is a map, it seems to be more
metaphorical than—”
“No, the map is quite real, I assure you. And it points to a very real location. You must keep it safe. I cannot
impress upon you enough how important this is. You are being pursued, but if you can travel unseen to my
location, I will provide sanctuary . . . and answers.”
The man hesitated, apparently uncertain.
“My friend,” the old man began, choosing his words carefully. “There is a refuge in Rome, north of the
Tiber, which contains ten stones from Mount Sinai, one from heaven itself, and one with the visage of Luke’s
dark father. Do you know my location?”
There was a long pause on the line, and then the man replied, “Yes, I do.”
The old man smiled. I thought you might, Professor. “Come at once. Make sure you’re not followed.”
CHAPTER 71
Mal’akh stood naked in the billowing warmth of his steam shower. He felt pure again, having washed off
the last remaining scent of ethanol. As the eucalyptus-infused vapors permeated his skin, he could feel his
pores opening to the heat. Then he began his ritual.
First, he rubbed depilatory chemicals across his tattooed body and scalp, removing any traces of body hair.
Hairless were the gods of the seven islands of Heliades. Then he massaged Abramelin oil into his softened
and receptive flesh. Abramelin is the sacred oil of the great Magi. Then he turned his shower lever hard to
the left, and the water turned ice cold. He stood beneath the frigid water for a full minute to close his pores
and trap the heat and energy within his core. The cold served as a reminder of the icy river in which this
transformation had begun.
When he stepped from the shower, he was shivering, but within seconds, his core heat emanated up through
his layers of flesh and warmed him. Mal’akh’s insides felt like a furnace. He stood naked before the mirror
and admired his form . . . perhaps the last time he would see himself as a mere mortal.
His feet were the talons of a hawk. His legs—Boaz and Jachin—were the ancient pillars of wisdom. His hips
and abdomen were the archways of mystical power. Hanging beneath the archway, his massive sex organ
bore the tattooed symbols of his destiny. In another life, this heavy shaft of flesh had been his source of
carnal pleasure. But no longer.
I have been purified.
Like the mystical eunuch monks of Katharoi, Mal’akh had removed his testicles. He had sacrificed his
physical potency for a more worthy one. Gods have no gender. Having shed the human imperfection of
gender along with the earthly pull of sexual temptation, Mal’akh had become like Ouranos, Attis, Sporus,
and the great castrati magicians of Arthurian legend. Every spiritual metamorphosis is preceded by a
physical one. Such was the lesson of all the great gods . . . from Osiris, to Tammuz, to Jesus, to Shiva, to the
Buddha himself.
I must shed the man who clothes me.
Abruptly, Mal’akh drew his gaze upward, past the double-headed phoenix on his chest, past the collage of
ancient sigils adorning his face, and directly to the top of his head. He tipped his head toward the mirror,
barely able to see the circle of bare flesh that waited there. This location on the body was sacred. Known as
the fontanel, it was the one area of the human skull that remained open at birth. An oculus to the brain.
Although this physiological portal closes within a matter of months, it remains a symbolic vestige of the lost
connection between the outer and inner worlds.
Mal’akh studied the sacred patch of virginal skin, which was enclosed by the crownlike circle of an
ouroboros—a mystical snake devouring its own tail. The bare flesh seemed to stare back at him . . . bright
with promise.
Robert Langdon soon would uncover the great treasure that Mal’akh required. Once Mal’akh possessed it,
the void on top of his head would be filled, and he would at last be prepared for his final transformation.
Mal’akh padded across his bedroom and took from his bottom drawer a long strip of white silk. As he had
done many times before, he wrapped it around his groin and buttocks. Then he went downstairs.
In his office, his computer had received an e-mail message.
It was from his contact:
WHAT YOU REQUIRE IS NOW WITHIN REACH.
I WILL CONTACT YOU WITHIN THE HOUR. PATIENCE.
Mal’akh smiled. It was time to make final preparations.
CHAPTER 72
The CIA field agent was in a foul mood as he descended from the reading-room balcony. Bellamy lied to us.
The agent had seen no heat signatures whatsoever upstairs near the Moses statue, nor anywhere else upstairs
for that matter.
So where the hell did Langdon go?
The agent retraced his steps now to the only place they’d spotted any heat signatures at all—the library’s
distribution hub. He descended the stairs again, moving beneath the octagonal console. The noise of the
rumbling conveyors was grating. Advancing into the space, he flipped down his thermal goggles and scanned
the room. Nothing. He looked toward the stacks, where the mangled door still showed hot from the
explosion. Other than that, he saw no—
Holy shit!
The agent jumped back as an unexpected luminescence drifted into his field of vision. Like a pair of ghosts,
the dimly glowing imprints of two humanoids had just emerged from the wall on a conveyor belt. Heat
signatures.
Stunned, the agent watched as the two apparitions circled the room on the conveyor loop and then
disappeared headfirst into a narrow hole in the wall. They rode the conveyor out? That’s insanity.
In addition to realizing they had just lost Robert Langdon through a hole in the wall, the field agent was now
aware that he had another problem. Langdon’s not alone?
He was just about to switch on his transceiver and call the team leader, but the team leader beat him to it.
“All points, we’ve got an abandoned Volvo on the plaza in front of the library. Registered to one Katherine
Solomon. Eyewitness says she entered the library not long ago. We suspect she’s with Robert Langdon.
Director Sato has ordered that we find them both immediately.”
“I’ve got heat signatures for both of them!” shouted the field agent in the distribution room. He explained the
situation.
“For Christ’s sake!” the team leader replied. “Where the hell does the conveyor go?”
The field agent was already consulting the employee reference schematic on the bulletin board. “Adams
Building,” he replied. “One block from here.”
“All points. Redirect to the Adams Building! NOW!”
CHAPTER 73
Sanctuary. Answers.
The words echoed in Langdon’s mind as he and Katherine burst through a side door of the Adams Building
and out into the cold winter night. The mysterious caller had conveyed his location cryptically, but Langdon
had understood. Katherine’s reaction to their destination had been surprisingly sanguine: Where better to find
One True God?
Now the question was how to get there.
Langdon spun in place, trying to get his bearings. It was dark, but thankfully the weather had cleared. They
were standing in a small courtyard. In the distance, the Capitol Dome looked startlingly far away, and
Langdon realized this was the first moment he had stepped outside since arriving at the Capitol several hours
ago.
So much for my lecture.
“Robert, look.” Katherine pointed toward the silhouette of the Jefferson Building.
Langdon’s first reaction on seeing the building was astonishment that they had traveled so far underground
on a conveyor belt. His second reaction, however, was alarm. The Jefferson Building was now abuzz with
activity—trucks and cars pulling in, men shouting. Is that a searchlight?
Langdon grabbed Katherine’s hand. “Come on.”
They ran northeast across the courtyard, quickly disappearing from view behind an elegant U-shaped
building, which Langdon realized was the Folger Shakespeare Library. This particular building seemed
appropriate camouflage for them tonight, as it housed the original Latin manuscript of Francis Bacon’s New
Atlantis, the utopian vision on which the American forefathers had allegedly modeled a new world based on
ancient knowledge. Even so, Langdon would not be stopping.
We need a cab.
They arrived at the corner of Third Street and East Capitol. The traffic was sparse, and Langdon felt fading
hope as he scanned for taxis. He and Katherine hurried northward on Third Street, putting distance between
themselves and the Library of Congress. It was not until they had gone an entire block that Langdon finally
spotted a cab rounding the corner. He flagged it down, and the cab pulled over.
Middle Eastern music played on his radio, and the young Arab driver gave them a friendly smile. “Where
to?” the driver asked as they jumped into the car.
“We need to go to—”
“Northwest!” Katherine interjected, pointing up Third Street away from the Jefferson Building. “Drive
toward Union Station, then left on Massachusetts Avenue. We’ll tell you when to stop.”
The driver shrugged, closed the Plexiglas divider, and turned his music back on.
Katherine shot Langdon an admonishing look as if to say: “Leave no trail.” She pointed out the window,
directing Langdon’s attention to a black helicopter that was skimming in low, approaching the area. Shit.
Sato was apparently dead serious about recovering Solomon’s pyramid.
As they watched the helicopter land between the Jefferson and Adams buildings, Katherine turned to him,
looking increasingly worried. “Can I see your cell phone for a second?”
Langdon handed her his phone.
“Peter told me you have an eidetic memory?” she said, rolling down her window. “And that you remember
every phone number you’ve ever dialed?”
“That’s true, but—”
Katherine hurled his phone out into the night. Langdon spun in his seat and watched as his cell phone
cartwheeled and splintered into pieces on the pavement behind them. “Why did you do that!”
“Off the grid,” Katherine said, her eyes grave. “This pyramid is our only hope of finding my brother, and I
have no intention of letting the CIA steal it from us.”
In the front seat, Omar Amirana bobbed his head and hummed along with his music. Tonight had been slow,
and he felt blessed to finally have a fare. His cab was just passing Stanton Park, when the familiar voice of
his company dispatcher crackled over the radio.
“This is Dispatch. All vehicles in the area of the National Mall. We have just received a bulletin from
government authorities regarding two fugitives in the area of the Adams Building . . .”
Omar listened in amazement as Dispatch described the precise couple
in his cab. He stole an uneasy glance in his rearview mirror. Omar had to admit, the tall guy did look familiar
somehow. Did I see him on America’s Most Wanted?
Gingerly, Omar reached for his radio handset. “Dispatch?” he said, speaking quietly into the transceiver.
“This is cab one-three-four. The two people you asked about—they are in my cab . . . right now.”
Dispatch immediately advised Omar what to do. Omar’s hands were trembling as he called the phone
number Dispatch had given him. The voice that answered was tight and efficient, like that of a soldier.
“This is Agent Turner Simkins, CIA field ops. Who is this?”
“Um . . . I’m the taxi driver?” Omar said. “I was told to call about the two—”
“Are the fugitives currently in your vehicle? Answer only yes or no.”
“Yes.”
“Can they hear this conversation? Yes or no?”
“No. The slider is—”
“Where are you taking them?”
“Northwest on Massachusetts.”
“Specific destination?”
“They didn’t say.”
The agent hesitated. “Is the male passenger carrying a leather bag?”
Omar glanced in the rearview mirror, and his eyes went wide. “Yes! That bag doesn’t have explosives or
anything in—”
“Listen carefully,” the agent said. “You are in no danger so long as you follow my directions exactly. Is that
clear?”
“Yes, sir.”
“What is your name?”
“Omar,” he said, breaking a sweat.
“Listen, Omar,” the man said calmly. “You’re doing great. I want you to drive as slowly as possible while I
get my team out in front of you. Do you understand?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Also, is your cab equipped with an intercom system so you can communicate with them in the backseat?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Good. Here’s what I want you to do.”
CHAPTER 74
The Jungle, as it is known, is the centerpiece of the U.S. Botanic Garden (USBG)—America’s living
museum—located adjacent to the U.S. Capitol Building. Technically a rain forest, the Jungle is housed in a
towering greenhouse, complete with soaring rubber trees, strangler figs, and a canopy catwalk for more
daring tourists.
Normally, Warren Bellamy felt nurtured by the Jungle’s earthy smells and the sunlight glinting through the
mist that filtered down from the vapor nozzles in the glass ceiling. Tonight, however, lit only by moonlight,
the Jungle terrified him. He was sweating profusely, writhing against the cramps that now stabbed at his
arms, still pinned painfully behind him.
Director Sato paced before him, puffing calmly on her cigarette—the equivalent of ecoterrorism in this
carefully calibrated environment. Her face looked almost demonic in the smoke-filled moonlight that
streamed down through the glass ceiling overhead.
“So then,” Sato continued, “when you arrived at the Capitol tonight, and you discovered that I was already
there . . . you made a decision. Rather than making your presence known to me, you descended quietly into
the SBB, where, at great risk to yourself, you attacked Chief Anderson and myself, and you helped Langdon
escape with the pyramid and capstone.” She rubbed her shoulder. “An interesting choice.”
A choice I would make again, Bellamy thought. “Where is Peter?” he demanded angrily.
“How would I know?” Sato said.
“You seem to know everything else!” Bellamy fired back at her, making no attempt to hide his suspicion that
she was somehow behind all this. “You knew to go to the Capitol Building. You knew to find Robert
Langdon. And you even knew to X-ray Langdon’s bag to find the capstone. Obviously, someone is giving
you a lot of inside information.”
Sato laughed coldly and stepped closer to him. “Mr. Bellamy, is that why you attacked me? Do you think I’m
the enemy? Do you think I’m trying to steal your little pyramid?” Sato took a drag on her cigarette and blew
the smoke out of her nostrils. “Listen carefully. No one understands better than I do the importance of
keeping secrets. I believe, as you do, that there is certain information to which the masses should not be
privy. Tonight, however, there are forces at work that I fear you have not yet grasped. The man who
kidnapped Peter Solomon holds enormous power . . . a power that you apparently have yet to realize. Believe
me, he is a walking time bomb . . . capable of initiating a series of events that will profoundly change the
world as you know it.”
“I don’t understand.” Bellamy shifted on the bench, his arms aching in his handcuffs.
“You don’t need to understand. You need to obey. Right now, my only hope of averting a major disaster is to
cooperate with this man . . . and to give him exactly what he wants. Which means, you are going to call Mr.
Langdon and tell him to turn himself in, along with the pyramid and capstone. Once Langdon is in my
custody, he will decrypt the pyramid’s inscription, obtain whatever information this man is demanding, and
provide him with exactly what he wants.”
The location of the spiral staircase that leads to the Ancient Mysteries? “I can’t do that. I’ve taken vows of
secrecy.”
Sato erupted. “I don’t give a damn what you’ve vowed, I will throw you in prison so fast—”
“Threaten me all you like,” Bellamy said defiantly. “I will not help you.”
Sato took a deep breath and spoke now in a fearsome whisper. “Mr. Bellamy, you have no idea what’s really
going on tonight, do you?”
The tense silence hung for several seconds, finally broken by the sound of Sato’s phone. She plunged her
hand into her pocket and eagerly snatched it out. “Talk to me,” she answered, listening carefully to the reply.
“Where is their taxi now? How long? Okay, good. Bring them to the U.S. Botanic Garden. Service entrance.
And make sure you get me that god-damn pyramid and capstone.”
Sato hung up and turned back to Bellamy with a smug smile. “Well then . . . it seems you’re fast outliving
your usefulness.”
CHAPTER 75
Robert Langdon stared blankly into space, feeling too tired to urge the slow-moving taxi driver to pick up
the pace. Beside him, Katherine had fallen silent, too, looking frustrated by their lack of understanding of
what made the pyramid so special. They had again been through everything they knew about the pyramid,
the capstone, and the evening’s strange events; they still had no ideas as to how this pyramid could possibly
be considered a map to anything at all.
Jeova Sanctus Unus? The secret hides within The Order?
Their mysterious contact had promised them answers if they could meet him at a specific place. A refuge in
Rome, north of the Tiber. Langdon knew the forefathers’ “new Rome” had been renamed Washington early
in her history, and yet vestiges of their original dream remained: the Tiber’s waters still flowed into the
Potomac; senators still convened beneath a replica of St. Peter’s dome; and Vulcan and Minerva still watched
over the Rotunda’s long-extinguished flame.
The answers sought by Langdon and Katherine were apparently waiting for them just a few miles ahead.
Northwest on Massachusetts Avenue. Their destination was indeed a refuge . . . north of Washington’s Tiber
Creek. Langdon wished the driver would speed up.
Abruptly, Katherine jolted upright in her seat, as if she had made a sudden realization. “Oh my God, Robert!”
She turned to him, her face going white. She hesitated a moment and then spoke emphatically. “We’re going
the wrong way!”
“No, this is right,” Langdon countered. “It’s northwest on Massachu—”
“No! I mean we’re going to the wrong place!”
Langdon was mystified. He had already told Katherine how he knew what location was being described by
the mysterious caller. It contains ten stones from Mount Sinai, one from heaven itself, and one with the
visage of Luke’s dark father. Only one building on earth could make those claims. And that was exactly
where this taxi was headed.
“Katherine, I’m certain the location is correct.”
“No!” she shouted. “We don’t need to go there anymore. I figured out the pyramid and capstone! I know
what this is all about!”
Langdon was amazed. “You understand it?”
“Yes! We have to go to Freedom Plaza instead!”
Now Langdon was lost. Freedom Plaza, although nearby, seemed totally irrelevant.
“Jeova Sanctus Unus!” Katherine said. “The One True God of the Hebrews. The sacred symbol of the
Hebrews is the Jewish star—the Seal of Solomon—an important symbol to the Masons!” She fished a dollar
bill out of her pocket. “Give me your pen.”
Bewildered, Langdon pulled a pen from his jacket.
“Look.” She spread the bill out on her thigh and took his pen, pointing to the Great Seal on the back. “If you
superimpose Solomon’s seal on the Great Seal of the United States . . .” She drew the symbol of a Jewish star
precisely over the pyramid. “Look what you get!”
Langdon looked down at the bill and then back at Katherine as if she were mad.
“Robert, look more closely! Don’t you see what I’m pointing at?”
He glanced back at the drawing.
What in the world is she getting at? Langdon had seen this image before. It was popular among conspiracy
theorists as “proof” that the Masons held secret influence over our early nation. When the six-pointed star
was laid perfectly over the Great Seal of the United States, the star’s top vertex fit perfectly over the Masonic
all-seeing eye . . . and, quite eerily, the other five vertices clearly pointed to the letters M-A-S-O-N.
“Katherine, that’s just a coincidence, and I still don’t see how it has anything to do with Freedom Plaza.”
“Look again!” she said, sounding almost angry now. “You’re not looking where I am pointing! Right there.
Don’t you see it?”
An instant later, Langdon saw it.
CIA field-operations leader Turner Simkins stood outside the Adams Building and pressed his cell phone
tightly to his ear, straining to hear the conversation now taking place in the back of the taxi. Something just
happened. His team was about to board the modified Sikorsky UH-60 helicopter to head northwest and set up
a roadblock, but now it seemed the situation had suddenly changed.
Seconds ago, Katherine Solomon had begun insisting they were going to the wrong destination. Her
explanation—something about the dollar bill and Jewish stars—made no sense to the team leader, nor,
apparently, to Robert Langdon. At least at first. Now, however, Langdon seemed to have grasped her
meaning.
“My God, you’re right!” Langdon blurted. “I didn’t see it earlier!”
Suddenly Simkins could hear someone banging on the driver’s divider, and then it slid open. “Change of
plans,” Katherine shouted to the driver. “Take us to Freedom Plaza!”
“Freedom Plaza?” the cabbie said, sounding nervous. “Not northwest on Massachusetts?”
“Forget that!” Katherine shouted. “Freedom Plaza! Go left here! Here! HERE!”
Agent Simkins heard the cab screeching around a corner. Katherine was talking excitedly again to Langdon,
saying something about the famous bronze cast of the Great Seal embedded in the plaza.
“Ma’am, just to confirm,” the cabbie’s voice interjected, sounding tense. “We’re going to Freedom Plaza—
on the corner of Pennsylvania and Thirteenth?”
“Yes!” Katherine said. “Hurry!”
“It’s very close. Two minutes.”
Simkins smiled. Nicely done, Omar. As he dashed toward the idling helicopter, he shouted to his team.
“We’ve got them! Freedom Plaza! Move!”
CHAPTER 76
Freedom Plaza is a map.
Located at the corner of Pennsylvania Avenue and Thirteenth Street, the plaza’s vast surface of inlaid stone
depicts the streets of Washington as they were originally envisioned by Pierre L’Enfant. The plaza is a
popular tourist destination not only because the giant map is fun to walk on, but also because Martin Luther
King Jr., for whom Freedom Plaza is named, wrote much of his “I Have a Dream” speech in the nearby
Willard Hotel.
D.C. cabdriver Omar Amirana brought tourists to Freedom Plaza all the time, but tonight, his two passengers
were obviously no ordinary sightseers. The CIA is chasing them? Omar had barely come to a stop at the curb
before the man and woman had jumped out.
“Stay right here!” the man in the tweed coat told Omar. “We’ll be right back!”
Omar watched the two people dash out onto the wide-open spaces of the enormous map, pointing and
shouting as they scanned the geometry of intersecting streets. Omar grabbed his cell phone off the dashboard.
“Sir, are you still there?”
“Yes, Omar!” a voice shouted, barely audible over a thundering noise on his end of the line. “Where are they
now?”
“Out on the map. It seems like they’re looking for something.”
“Do not let them out of your sight,” the agent shouted. “I’m almost there!”
Omar watched as the two fugitives quickly found the plaza’s famous Great Seal—one of the largest bronze
medallions ever cast. They stood over it a moment and quickly began pointing to the southwest. Then the
man in tweed came racing back toward the cab. Omar quickly set his phone down on the dashboard as the
man arrived, breathless.
“Which direction is Alexandria, Virginia?” he demanded.
“Alexandria?” Omar pointed southwest, the exact same direction the man and woman had just pointed
toward.
“I knew it!” the man whispered beneath his breath. He spun and shouted back to the woman. “You’re right!
Alexandria!”
The woman now pointed across the plaza to an illuminated “Metro” sign nearby. “The Blue Line goes
directly there. We want King Street Station!”
Omar felt a surge of panic. Oh no.
The man turned back to Omar and handed him entirely too many bills for the fare. “Thanks. We’re all set.”
He hoisted his leather bag and ran off.
“Wait! I can drive you! I go there all the time!”
But it was too late. The man and woman were already dashing across the plaza. They disappeared down the
stairs into the Metro Center subway station.
Omar grabbed his cell phone. “Sir! They ran down into the subway! I couldn’t stop them! They’re taking the
Blue Line to Alexandria!”
“Stay right there!” the agent shouted. “I’ll be there in fifteen seconds!”
Omar looked down at the wad of bills the man had given him. The bill on top was apparently the one they
had been writing on. It had a Jewish star on top of the Great Seal of the United States. Sure enough, the star’s
points fell on letters that spelled MASON.
Without warning, Omar felt a deafening vibration all around him, as if a tractor trailer were about to collide
with his cab. He looked up, but the street was deserted. The noise increased, and suddenly a sleek black
helicopter dropped down out of the night and landed hard in the middle of the plaza map.
A group of black-clad men jumped out. Most ran toward the subway station, but one came dashing toward
Omar’s cab. He yanked open the passenger door. “Omar? Is that you?”
Omar nodded, speechless.
“Did they say where they were headed?” the agent demanded.
“Alexandria! King Street Station,” Omar blurted. “I offered to drive, but—”
“Did they say where in Alexandria they were going?”
“No! They looked at the medallion of the Great Seal on the plaza, then they asked about Alexandria, and they
paid me with this.” He handed the agent the dollar bill with the bizarre diagram. As the agent studied the bill,
Omar suddenly put it all together. The Masons! Alexandria! One of the most famous Masonic buildings in
America was in Alexandria. “That’s it!” he blurted. “The George Washington Masonic Memorial! It’s
directly across from King Street Station!”
“That it is,” the agent said, apparently having just come to the same realization as the rest of the agents came
sprinting back from the station.
“We missed them!” one of the men yelled. “Blue Line just left! They’re not down there!”
Agent Simkins checked his watch and turned back to Omar. “How long does the subway take to
Alexandria?”
“Ten minutes at least. Probably more.”
“Omar, you’ve done an excellent job. Thank you.”
“Sure. What’s this all about?!”
But Agent Simkins was already running back to the chopper, shouting as he went. “King Street Station!
We’ll get there before they do!”
Bewildered, Omar watched the great black bird lift off. It banked hard to the south across Pennsylvania
Avenue, and then thundered off into the night.
Underneath the cabbie’s feet, a subway train was picking up speed as it headed away from Freedom Plaza.
On board, Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon sat breathless, neither one saying a word as the train
whisked them toward their destination.
CHAPTER 77
The memory always began the same way.
He was falling . . . plummeting backward toward an ice-covered river at the bottom of a deep ravine. Above
him, the merciless gray eyes of Peter Solomon stared down over the barrel of Andros’s handgun. As he fell,
the world above him receded, everything disappearing as he was enveloped by the cloud of billowing mist
from the waterfall upstream.
For an instant, everything was white, like heaven.
Then he hit the ice.
Cold. Black. Pain.
He was tumbling . . . being dragged by a powerful force that pounded him relentlessly across rocks in an
impossibly cold void. His lungs ached for air, and yet his chest muscles had contracted so violently in the
cold that he was unable even to inhale.
I’m under the ice.
The ice near the waterfall was apparently thin on account of the turbulent water, and Andros had broken
directly through it. Now he was being washed downstream, trapped beneath a transparent ceiling. He clawed
at the underside of the ice, trying to break out, but he had no leverage. The searing pain from the bullet hole
in his shoulder was evaporating, as was the sting of the bird shot; both were blotted out now by the crippling
throb of his body going numb.
The current was accelerating, slingshotting him around a bend in the river. His body screamed for oxygen.
Suddenly he was tangled in branches, lodged against a tree that had fallen into the water. Think! He groped
wildly at the branch, working his way toward the surface, finding the spot where the branch pierced up
through the ice. His fingertips found the tiny space of open water surrounding the branch, and he pulled at
the edges, trying to break the hole wider; once, twice, the opening was growing, now several inches across.
Propping himself against the branch, he tipped his head back and pressed his mouth against the small
opening. The winter air that poured into his lungs felt warm. The sudden burst of oxygen fueled his hope. He
planted his feet on the tree trunk and pressed his back and shoulders forcefully upward. The ice around the
fallen tree, perforated by branches and debris, was weakened already, and as he drove his powerful legs into
the trunk, his head and shoulders broke through the ice, crashing up into the winter night. Air poured into his
lungs. Still mostly submerged, he wriggled desperately upward, pushing with his legs, pulling with his arms,
until finally he was out of the water, lying breathless on the bare ice.
Andros tore off his soaked ski mask and pocketed it, glancing back upstream for Peter Solomon. The bend in
the river obscured his view. His chest was burning again. Quietly, he dragged a small branch over the hole in
the ice in order to hide it. The hole would be frozen again by morning.
As Andros staggered into the woods, it began to snow. He had no idea how far he had run when he stumbled
out of the woods onto an embankment beside a small highway. He was delirious and hypothermic. The snow
was falling harder now, and a single set of headlights approached in the distance. Andros waved wildly, and
the lone pickup truck immediately pulled over. It had Vermont plates. An old man in a red plaid shirt jumped
out.
Andros staggered toward him, holding his bleeding chest. “A hunter . . . shot me! I need a . . . hospital!”
Without hesitation, the old man helped Andros up into the passenger seat of the truck and turned up the
heater. “Where’s the nearest hospital?!”
Andros had no idea, but he pointed south. “Next exit.” We’re not going to a hospital.
The old man from Vermont was reported missing the next day, but nobody had any idea where on his
journey from Vermont he might have disappeared in the blinding snowstorm. Nor did anyone link his
disappearance to the other news story that dominated the headlines the next day—the shocking murder of
Isabel Solomon.
When Andros awoke, he was lying in a desolate bedroom of a cheap motel that had been boarded up for the
season. He recalled breaking in and binding his wounds with torn bedsheets, and then burrowing into a
flimsy bed beneath a pile of musty blankets. He was famished.
He limped to the bathroom and saw the pile of bloody bird-shot pellets in the sink. He vaguely recalled
prying them out of his chest. Raising his eyes to the dirty mirror, he reluctantly unwrapped his bloody
bandages to survey the damage. The hard muscles of his chest and abdomen had stopped the bird shot from
penetrating too deep, and yet his body, once perfect, was now ruined with wounds. The single bullet fired by
Peter Solomon had apparently gone cleanly through his shoulder, leaving a bloody crater.
Making matters worse, Andros had failed to obtain that for which he had traveled all this distance. The
pyramid. His stomach growled, and he limped outside to the man’s truck, hoping maybe to find food. The
pickup was now covered with heavy snow, and Andros wondered how long he had been sleeping in this old
motel. Thank God I woke up. Andros found no food anywhere in the front seat, but he did find some arthritis
painkillers in the glove compartment. He took a handful, washing them down with several mouthfuls of
snow.
I need food.
A few hours later, the pickup that pulled out from behind the old motel looked nothing like the truck that had
pulled in two days earlier. The cab cap was missing, as were the hubcaps, bumper stickers, and all of the
trim. The Vermont plates were gone, replaced by those from an old maintenance truck Andros had found
parked by the motel Dumpster, into which he had thrown all the bloody sheets, bird shot, and other evidence
that he had ever been at the motel.
Andros had not given up on the pyramid, but for the moment it would have to wait. He needed to hide, heal,
and above all, eat. He found a roadside diner where he gorged himself on eggs, bacon, hash browns, and
three glasses of orange juice. When he was done, he ordered more food to go. Back on the road, Andros
listened to the truck’s old radio. He had not seen a television or newspaper since his ordeal, and when he
finally heard a local news station, the report stunned him.
“FBI investigators,” a news announcer said, “continue their search for the armed intruder who murdered
Isabel Solomon in her Potomac home two days ago. The murderer is believed to have fallen through the ice
and been washed out to sea.”
Andros froze. Murdered Isabel Solomon? He drove on in bewildered silence, listening to the full report.
It was time to get far, far away from this place.
The Upper West Side apartment offered breathtaking views of Central Park. Andros had chosen it because
the sea of green outside his window reminded him of his lost view of the Adriatic. Although he knew he
should be happy to be alive, he was not. The emptiness had never left him, and he found himself fixated on
his failed attempt to steal Peter Solomon’s pyramid.
Andros had spent long hours researching the Legend of the Masonic Pyramid, and although nobody seemed
to agree on whether or not the pyramid was real, they all concurred on its famous promise of vast wisdom
and power. The Masonic Pyramid is real, Andros told himself. My inside information is irrefutable.
Fate had placed the pyramid within Andros’s reach, and he knew that ignoring it was like holding a winning
lottery ticket and never cashing it in. I am the only non-Mason alive who knows the pyramid is real . . . as
well as the identity of the man who guards it.
Months had passed, and although his body had healed, Andros was no longer the cocky specimen he had
been in Greece. He had stopped working out, and he had stopped admiring himself naked in the mirror. He
felt as if his body were beginning to show signs of age. His once-perfect skin was a patchwork of scars, and
this only depressed him further. He still relied on the painkillers that had nursed him through his recovery,
and he felt himself slipping back to the lifestyle that had put him in Soganlik Prison. He didn’t care. The body
craves what the body craves.
One night, he was in Greenwich Village buying drugs from a man whose forearm had been tattooed with a
long, jagged lightning bolt. Andros asked him about it, and the man told him the tattoo was covering a long
scar he had gotten in a car accident. “Seeing the scar every day reminded me of the accident,” the dealer said,
“and so I tattooed over it with a symbol of personal power. I took back control.”
That night, high on his new stash of drugs, Andros staggered into a local tattoo parlor and took off his shirt.
“I want to hide these scars,” he announced. I want to take back control.
“Hide them?” The tattoo artist eyed his chest. “With what?”
“Tattoos.”
“Yes . . . I mean tattoos of what?”
Andros shrugged, wanting nothing more than to hide the ugly reminders of his past. “I don’t know. You
choose.”
The artist shook his head and handed Andros a pamphlet on the ancient and sacred tradition of tattooing.
“Come back when you’re ready.”
Andros discovered that the New York Public Library had in its collection fifty-three books on tattooing, and
within a few weeks, he had read them all. Having rediscovered his passion for reading, he began carrying
entire backpacks of books back and forth between the library and his apartment, where he voraciously
devoured them while overlooking Central Park.
These books on tattoos had opened a door to a strange world Andros
had never known existed—a world of symbols, mysticism, mythology, and the magical arts. The more he
read, the more he realized how blind he had been. He began keeping notebooks of his ideas, his sketches, and
his strange dreams. When he could no longer find what he wanted at the library, he paid rare-book dealers to
purchase for him some of the most esoteric texts on earth.
De Praestigiis Daemonum . . . Lemegeton . . . Ars Almadel . . . Grimorium Verum . . . Ars Notoria . . . and on
and on. He read them all, becoming more and more certain that the world still had many treasures yet to offer
him. There are secrets out there that transcend human understanding.
Then he discovered the writings of Aleister Crowley—a visionary mystic from the early 1900s—whom the
church had deemed “the most evil man who ever lived.” Great minds are always feared by lesser minds.
Andros learned about the power of ritual and incantation. He learned that sacred words, if properly spoken,
functioned like keys that opened gateways to other worlds. There is a shadow universe beyond this one . . . a
world from which I can draw power. And although Andros longed to harness that power, he knew there were
rules and tasks to be completed beforehand.
Become something holy, Crowley wrote. Make yourself sacred.
The ancient rite of “sacred making” had once been the law of the land. From the early Hebrews who made
burnt offerings at the Temple, to the Mayans who beheaded humans atop the pyramids of Chichén Itzá, to
Jesus Christ, who offered his body on the cross, the ancients understood God’s requirement for sacrifice.
Sacrifice was the original ritual by which humans drew favor from the gods and made themselves holy.
Sacra—sacred.
Face— make.
Even though the rite of sacrifice had been abandoned eons ago, its power remained. There had been a handful
of modern mystics, including Aleister Crowley, who practiced the Art, perfecting it over time, and
transforming themselves gradually into something more. Andros craved to transform himself as they had.
And yet he knew he would have to cross a dangerous bridge to do so.
Blood is all that separates the light from the dark.
One night, a crow flew through Andros’s open bathroom window and got trapped in his apartment. Andros
watched the bird flutter around for a while and then finally stop, apparently accepting its inability to escape.
Andros had learned enough to recognize a sign. I am being urged onward.
Clutching the bird in one hand, he stood at the makeshift altar in his
kitchen and raised a sharp knife, speaking aloud the incantation he had memorized.
“Camiach, Eomiahe, Emial, Macbal, Emoii, Zazean . . . by the most holy names of the angels in the Book of
Assamaian, I conjure thee that thou assist me in this operation by the power of the One True God.”
Andros now lowered the knife and carefully pierced the large vein on the right wing of the panicked bird.
The crow began to bleed. As he watched the stream of red liquid flowing down into the metal cup he had
placed as a receptacle, he felt an unexpected chill in the air. Nonetheless, he continued.
“Almighty Adonai, Arathron, Ashai, Elohim, Elohi, Elion, Asher Eheieh, Shaddai . . . be my aid, so that this
blood may have power and efficacy in all wherein I shall wish, and in all that I shall demand.”
That night, he dreamed of birds . . . of a giant phoenix rising from a billowing fire. The next morning, he
awoke with an energy he had not felt since childhood. He went running in the park, faster and farther than
he’d imagined possible. When he could run no longer, he stopped to do pushups and sit-ups. Countless
repetitions. Still he had energy.
That night, again, he dreamed of the phoenix.
Autumn had fallen again on Central Park, and the wildlife were scurrying about searching for food for
winter. Andros despised the cold, and yet his carefully hidden traps were now overflowing with live rats and
squirrels. He took them home in his backpack, performing rituals of increasing complexity.
Emanual, Massiach, Yod, He, Vaud . . . please find me worthy.
The blood rituals fueled his vitality. Andros felt younger every day. He continued to read day and night—
ancient mystical texts, epic medieval poems, the early philosophers—and the more he learned about the true
nature of things, the more he realized that all hope for mankind was lost. They are blind . . . wandering
aimlessly in a world they will never understand.
Andros was still a man, but he sensed he was evolving into something else. Something greater. Something
sacred. His massive physique had emerged from dormancy, more powerful now than ever before. He finally
understood its true purpose. My body is but a vessel for my most potent treasure . . . my mind.
Andros knew his true potential had not yet been realized, and he delved deeper. What is my destiny? All the
ancient texts spoke of good and
evil . . . and of man’s need to choose between them. I made my choice long ago, he knew, and yet he felt no
remorse. What is evil, if not a natural law? Darkness followed light. Chaos followed order. Entropy was
fundamental. Everything decayed. The perfectly ordered crystal eventually turned into random particles of
dust.
There are those who create . . . and those who destroy.
It was not until Andros read John Milton’s Paradise Lost that he saw his destiny materialize before him. He
read of the great fallen angel . . . the warrior demon who fought against the light . . . the valiant one . . . the
angel called Moloch.
Moloch walked the earth as a god. The angel’s name, Andros later learned, when translated to the ancient
tongue, became Mal’akh.
And so shall I.
Like all great transformations, this one had to begin with a sacrifice . . . but not of rats, nor birds. No, this
transformation required a true sacrifice.
There is but one worthy sacrifice.
Suddenly he had a sense of clarity unlike anything he had ever experienced in his life. His entire destiny had
materialized. For three straight days he sketched on an enormous sheet of paper. When he was done, he had
created a blueprint of what he would become.
He hung the life-size sketch on his wall and gazed into it as if into a mirror.
I am a masterpiece.
The next day, he took his drawing to the tattoo parlor.
He was ready.
CHAPTER 78
The George Washington Masonic Memorial stands atop Shuter’s Hill in Alexandria, Virginia. Built in three
distinct tiers of increasing architectural complexity from bottom to top—Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian—the
structure stands as a physical symbol of man’s intellectual ascent. Inspired by the ancient Pharos lighthouse
of Alexandria, Egypt, this soaring tower is capped by an Egyptian pyramid with a flamelike finial.
Inside the spectacular marble foyer sits a massive bronze of George Washington in full Masonic regalia,
along with the actual trowel he used to lay the cornerstone of the Capitol Building. Above the foyer, nine
different levels bear names like the Grotto, the Crypt Room, and the Knights Templar Chapel. Among the
treasures housed within these spaces are over twenty thousand volumes of Masonic writings, a dazzling
replica of the Ark of the Covenant, and even a scale model of the throne room in King Solomon’s Temple.
CIA agent Simkins checked his watch as the modified UH-60 chopper skimmed in low over the Potomac. Six
minutes until their train arrives. He exhaled and gazed out the window at the shining Masonic Memorial on
the horizon. He had to admit, the brilliantly shining tower was as impressive as any building on the National
Mall. Simkins had never been inside the memorial, and tonight would be no different. If all went according
to plan, Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon would never make it out of the subway station.
“Over there!” Simkins shouted to the pilot, pointing down at the King Street subway station across from the
memorial. The pilot banked the helicopter and set it down on a grassy area at the foot of Shuter’s Hill.
Pedestrians looked up in surprise as Simkins and his team piled out, dashed across the street, and ran down
into King Street Station. In the stairwell, several departing passengers leaped out of the way, plastering
themselves to the walls as the phalanx of armed men in black thundered past them.
The King Street Station was larger than Simkins had anticipated, apparently serving several different lines—
Blue, Yellow, and Amtrak. He raced over to the Metro map on the wall, found Freedom Plaza and the direct
line to this location.
“Blue Line, southbound platform!” Simkins shouted. “Get down there and clear everyone out!” His team
dashed off.
Simkins rushed over to the ticket booth, flashed his identification, and shouted to the woman inside. “The
next train from Metro Center—what time is it due?!”
The woman inside looked frightened. “I’m not sure. Blue Line arrives every eleven minutes. There’s no set
schedule.”
“How long since the last train?”
“Five . . . six minutes, maybe? No more than that.”
Turner did the math. Perfect. The next train had to be Langdon’s.
Inside a fast-moving subway car, Katherine Solomon shifted uncomfortably on the hard plastic seat. The
bright fluorescent lights overhead hurt her eyes, and she fought the impulse to let her eyelids close, even for a
second. Langdon sat beside her in the empty car, staring blankly down at the leather bag at his feet. His
eyelids looked heavy, too, as if the rhythmic sway of the moving car were lulling him into a trance.
Katherine pictured the strange contents of Langdon’s bag. Why does the CIA want this pyramid? Bellamy
had said that Sato might be pursuing the pyramid because she knew its true potential. But even if this
pyramid somehow did reveal the hiding place of ancient secrets, Katherine found it hard to believe that its
promise of primeval mystical wisdom would interest the CIA.
Then again, she reminded herself, the CIA had been caught several times running parapsychological or psi
programs that bordered on ancient magic and mysticism. In 1995, the “Stargate/Scannate” scandal had
exposed a classified CIA technology called remote viewing—a kind of telepathic mind travel that enabled a
“viewer” to transport his mind’s eye to any location on earth and spy there, without being physically present.
Of course, the technology was nothing new. Mystics called it astral projection, and yogis called it out-ofbody
experience. Unfortunately, horrified American taxpayers called it absurd, and the program had been
scuttled. At least publicly.
Ironically, Katherine saw remarkable connections between the CIA’s failed programs and her own
breakthroughs in Noetic Science.
Katherine felt eager to call the police and find out if they had discovered anything in Kalorama Heights, but
she and Langdon were phoneless now, and making contact with the authorities would probably be a mistake
anyway; there was no telling how far Sato’s reach extended.
Patience, Katherine. Within minutes, they would be in a safe hiding place, guests of a man who had assured
them he could provide answers. Katherine hoped his answers, whatever they might be, would help her save
her brother.
“Robert?” she whispered, glancing up at the subway map. “Next stop is ours.”
Langdon emerged slowly from his daydream. “Right, thanks.” As the train rumbled toward the station, he
collected his daybag and gave Katherine an uncertain glance. “Let’s just hope our arrival is uneventful.”
By the time Turner Simkins dashed down to join his men, the subway platform had been entirely cleared, and
his team was fanning out, taking up positions behind the support pillars that ran the length of the platform. A
distant rumble echoed in the tunnel at the other end of the platform, and as it grew louder, Simkins felt the
push of stale warm air billowing around him.
No escape, Mr. Langdon.
Simkins turned to the two agents he had told to join him on the platform. “Identification and weapons out.
These trains are automated, but they all have a conductor who opens the doors. Find him.”
The train’s headlamp now appeared down the tunnel, and the sound of squealing brakes pierced the air. As
the train burst into the station and began slowing down, Simkins and his two agents leaned out over the track,
waving CIA identification badges and straining to make eye contact with the conductor before he could open
the doors.
The train was closing fast. In the third car, Simkins finally saw the startled face of the conductor, who was
apparently trying to figure out why three men in black were all waving identification badges at him. Simkins
jogged toward the train, which was now nearing a full stop.
“CIA!” Simkins shouted, holding up his ID. “Do NOT open the doors!” As the train glided slowly past him,
he went toward the conductor’s car, shouting in at him. “Do not open your doors! Do you understand?! Do
NOT open your doors!”
The train came to a full stop, its wide-eyed conductor nodding repeatedly. “What’s wrong?!” the man
demanded through his side window.
“Don’t let this train move,” Simkins said. “And don’t open the doors.”
“Okay.”
“Can you let us into the first car?”
The conductor nodded. Looking fearful, he stepped out of the train, closing the door behind him. He escorted
Simkins and his men to the first car, where he manually opened the door.
“Lock it behind us,” Simkins said, pulling his weapon. Simkins and his men stepped quickly into the stark
light of the first car. The conductor locked the door behind them.
The first car contained only four passengers—three teenage boys and an old woman—all of whom looked
understandably startled to see three armed men entering. Simkins held up his ID. “Everything’s fine. Just
stay seated.”
Simkins and his men now began their sweep, pushing toward the back of the sealed train one car at a time—
“squeezing toothpaste,” as it was called during his training at the Farm. Very few passengers were on this
train, and halfway to the back, the agents still had seen nobody even remotely resembling the description of
Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon. Nonetheless, Simkins remained confident. There was absolutely no
place to hide on a subway car. No bathrooms, no storage, and no alternative exits. Even if the targets had
seen them board the train and fled to the back, there was no way out. Prying open a door was almost
impossible, and Simkins had men watching the platform and both sides of the train anyway.
Patience.
By the time Simkins reached the second-to-last car, however, he was feeling edgy. This penultimate car had
only one passenger—a Chinese man. Simkins and his agents moved through, scanning for any place to hide.
There was none.
“Last car,” Simkins said, raising his weapon as the threesome moved toward the threshold of the train’s final
section. As they stepped into the last car, all three of them immediately stopped and stared.
What the . . . ?! Simkins raced to the rear of the deserted cabin, searching behind all the seats. He spun back
to his men, blood boiling. “Where the hell did they go?!”
CHAPTER 79
Eight miles due north of Alexandria, Virginia, Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon strode calmly across
a wide expanse of frost-covered lawn.
“You should be an actress,” Langdon said, still impressed by Katherine’s quick thinking and improvisational
skills.
“You weren’t half bad yourself.” She gave him a smile.
At first, Langdon had been mystified by Katherine’s abrupt antics in the taxi. Without warning, she had
suddenly demanded they go to Freedom Plaza based on some revelation about a Jewish star and the Great
Seal of the United States. She drew a well-known conspiracy-theory image on a dollar bill and then insisted
Langdon look closely where she was pointing.
Finally, Langdon realized that Katherine was pointing not at the dollar bill but at a tiny indicator bulb on the
back of the driver’s seat. The bulb was so covered with grime that he had not even noticed it. As he leaned
forward, however, he could see that the bulb was illuminated, emitting a dull red glow. He could also see the
two faint words directly beneath the lit bulb.
—INTERCOM ON—
Startled, Langdon glanced back at Katherine, whose frantic eyes were urging him to look into the front seat.
He obeyed, stealing a discreet glance through the divider. The cabby’s cell phone was on the dash, wide
open, illuminated, facing the intercom speaker. An instant later, Langdon understood Katherine’s actions.
They know we’re in this cab . . . they’ve been listening to us.
Langdon had no idea how much time he and Katherine had until their taxi was stopped and surrounded, but
he knew they had to act fast. Instantly, he’d begun playing along, realizing that Katherine’s desire to go to
Freedom Plaza had nothing to do with the pyramid but rather with its being a large subway station—Metro
Center—from which they could take the Red, Blue, or Orange lines in any of six different directions.
They jumped out of the taxi at Freedom Plaza, and Langdon took over, doing some improvising of his own,
leaving a trail to the Masonic Memorial in Alexandria before he and Katherine ran down into the subway
station, dashing past the Blue Line platforms and continuing on to the Red Line, where they caught a train in
the opposite direction.
Traveling six stops northbound to Tenleytown, they emerged all alone into a quiet, upscale neighborhood.
Their destination, the tallest structure for miles, was immediately visible on the horizon, just off
Massachusetts Avenue on a vast expanse of manicured lawn.
Now “off the grid,” as Katherine called it, the two of them walked across the damp grass. On their right was
a medieval-style garden, famous for its ancient rosebushes and Shadow House gazebo. They moved past the
garden, directly toward the magnificent building to which they had been summoned. A refuge containing ten
stones from Mount Sinai, one from heaven itself, and one with the visage of Luke’s dark father.
“I’ve never been here at night,” Katherine said, gazing up at the brightly lit towers. “It’s spectacular.”
Langdon agreed, having forgotten how impressive this place truly was. This neo-Gothic masterpiece stood at
the north end of Embassy Row. He hadn’t been here for years, not since writing a piece about it for a kids’
magazine in hopes of generating some excitement among young Americans to come see this amazing
landmark. His article—“Moses, Moon Rocks, and Star Wars”—had been part of the tourist literature for
years.
Washington National Cathedral, Langdon thought, feeling an unexpected anticipation at being back after all
these years. Where better to ask about One True God?
“This cathedral really has ten stones from Mount Sinai?” Katherine asked, gazing up at the twin bell towers.
Langdon nodded. “Near the main altar. They symbolize the Ten Commandments given to Moses on Mount
Sinai.”
“And there’s a lunar rock?”
A rock from heaven itself. “Yes. One of the stained-glass windows is called the Space Window and has a
fragment of moon rock embedded in it.”
“Okay, but you can’t be serious about the last thing.” Katherine glanced over, her pretty eyes flashing
skepticism. “A statue of . . . Darth Vader?”
Langdon chuckled. “Luke Skywalker’s dark father? Absolutely. Vader is one of the National Cathedral’s
most popular grotesques.” He pointed high into the west towers. “Tough to see him at night, but he’s there.”
“What in the world is Darth Vader doing on Washington National Cathedral?”
“A contest for kids to carve a gargoyle that depicted the face of evil. Darth won.”
They reached the grand staircase to the main entrance, which was set back in an eighty-foot archway beneath
a breathtaking rose window. As they began climbing, Langdon’s mind shifted to the mysterious stranger who
had called him. No names, please . . . Tell me, have you successfully protected the map that was entrusted to
you? Langdon’s shoulder ached from carrying the heavy stone pyramid, and he was looking forward to
setting it down. Sanctuary and answers.
As they approached the top of the stairs, they were met with an imposing pair of wooden doors. “Do we just
knock?” Katherine asked.
Langdon had been wondering the same thing, except that now one of the doors was creaking open.
“Who’s there?” a frail voice said. The face of a withered old man appeared in the doorway. He wore priest’s
robes and a blank stare. His eyes were opaque and white, clouded with cataracts.
“My name is Robert Langdon,” he replied. “Katherine Solomon and I are seeking sanctuary.”
The blind man exhaled in relief. “Thank God. I’ve been expecting you.”
CHAPTER 80
Warren Bellamy felt a sudden ray of hope.
Inside the Jungle, Director Sato had just received a phone call from a field agent and had immediately flown
into a tirade. “Well, you damn well better find them!” she shouted into her phone. “We’re running out of
time!” She had hung up and was now stalking back and forth in front of Bellamy as if trying to decide what
to do next.
Finally, she stopped directly in front of him and turned. “Mr. Bellamy, I’m going to ask you this once, and
only once.” She stared deep into his eyes. “Yes or no—do you have any idea where Robert Langdon might
have gone?”
Bellamy had more than a good idea, but he shook his head. “No.”
Sato’s piercing gaze had never left his eyes. “Unfortunately, part of my job is to know when people are
lying.”
Bellamy averted his eyes. “Sorry, I can’t help you.”
“Architect Bellamy,” Sato said, “tonight just after seven P.M., you were having dinner in a restaurant outside
the city when you received a phone call from a man who told you he had kidnapped Peter Solomon.”
Bellamy felt an instant chill and returned his eyes to hers. How could you possibly know that?!
“The man,” Sato continued, “told you that he had sent Robert Langdon to the Capitol Building and given
Langdon a task to complete . . . a task that required your help. He warned that if Langdon failed in this task,
your friend Peter Solomon would die. Panicked, you called all of Peter’s numbers but failed to reach him.
Understandably, you then raced to the Capitol.”
Bellamy could not imagine how Sato knew about this phone call.
“As you fled the Capitol,” Sato said behind the smoldering tip of her cigarette, “you sent a text message to
Solomon’s kidnapper, assuring him that you and Langdon had been successful in obtaining the Masonic
Pyramid.”
Where is she getting her information? Bellamy wondered. Not even Langdon knows I sent that text message.
Immediately after entering the tunnel
to the Library of Congress, Bellamy had stepped into the electrical room to plug in the construction lighting.
In the privacy of that moment, he had decided to send a quick text message to Solomon’s captor, telling him
about Sato’s involvement, but reassuring him that he—Bellamy—and Langdon had obtained the Masonic
Pyramid and would indeed cooperate with his demands. It was a lie, of course, but Bellamy hoped the
reassurance might buy time, both for Peter Solomon and also to hide the pyramid.
“Who told you I sent a text?” Bellamy demanded.
Sato tossed Bellamy’s cell phone on the bench next to him. “Hardly rocket science.”
Bellamy now remembered his phone and keys had been taken from him by the agents who captured him.
“As for the rest of my inside information,” Sato said, “the Patriot Act gives me the right to place a wiretap on
the phone of anyone I consider a viable threat to national security. I consider Peter Solomon to be such a
threat, and last night I took action.”
Bellamy could barely get his mind around what she was telling him. “You’re tapping Peter Solomon’s
phone?”
“Yes. This is how I knew the kidnapper called you at the restaurant. You called Peter’s cell phone and left an
anxious message explaining what had just happened.”
Bellamy realized she was right.
“We had also intercepted a call from Robert Langdon, who was in the Capitol Building, deeply confused to
learn he had been tricked into coming there. I went to the Capitol at once, arriving before you because I was
closer. As for how I knew to check the X-ray of Langdon’s bag . . . in light of my realization that Langdon
was involved in all of this, I had my staff reexamine a seemingly innocuous early-morning call between
Langdon and Peter Solomon’s cell phone, in which the kidnapper, posing as Solomon’s assistant, persuaded
Langdon to come for a lecture and also to bring a small package that Peter had entrusted to him. When
Langdon was not forthcoming with me about the package he was carrying, I requested the X-ray of his bag.”
Bellamy could barely think. Admittedly, everything Sato was saying was feasible, and yet something was not
adding up. “But . . . how could you possibly think Peter Solomon is a threat to national security?”
“Believe me, Peter Solomon is a serious national-security threat,” she snapped. “And frankly, Mr. Bellamy,
so are you.”
Bellamy sat bolt upright, the handcuffs chafing against his wrists. “I beg your pardon?!”
She forced a smile. “You Masons play a risky game. You keep a very, very dangerous secret.”
Is she talking about the Ancient Mysteries?
“Thankfully, you’ve always done a good job of keeping your secrets hidden. Unfortunately, recently you’ve
been careless, and tonight, your most dangerous secret is about to be unveiled to the world. And unless we
can stop that from happening, I assure you the results will be catastrophic.”
Bellamy stared in bewilderment.
“If you had not attacked me,” Sato said, “you would have realized that you and I are on the same team.”
The same team. The words sparked in Bellamy an idea that seemed almost impossible to fathom. Is Sato a
member of Eastern Star? The Order of the Eastern Star—often considered a sister organization to the
Masons—embraced a similar mystical philosophy of benevolence, secret wisdom, and spiritual openmindedness.
The same team? I’m in handcuffs! She’s tapping Peter’s phone!
“You will help me stop this man,” Sato said. “He has the potential to bring about a cataclysm from which this
country might not recover.” Her face was like stone.
“Then why aren’t you tracking him?”
Sato looked incredulous. “Do you think I’m not trying? My trace on Solomon’s cell phone went dead before
we got a location. His other number appears to be a disposable phone—which is almost impossible to track.
The private-jet company told us that Langdon’s flight was booked by Solomon’s assistant, on Solomon’s cell
phone, with Solomon’s Marquis Jet card. There is no trail. Not that it matters anyway. Even if we find out
exactly where he is, I can’t possibly risk moving in and trying to grab him.”
“Why not?!”
“I’d prefer not to share that, as the information is classified,” Sato said, patience clearly waning. “I am asking
you to trust me on this.”
“Well, I don’t!”
Sato’s eyes were like ice. She turned suddenly and shouted across the Jungle. “Agent Hartmann! The
briefcase, please.”
Bellamy heard the hiss of the electronic door, and an agent strode into the Jungle. He was carrying a sleek
titanium briefcase, which he set on the ground beside the OS director.
“Leave us,” Sato said.
As the agent departed, the door hissed again, and then everything fell silent.
Sato picked up the metal case, laid it across her lap, and popped the clasps. Then she raised her eyes slowly
to Bellamy. “I did not want to do this, but our time is running out, and you’ve left me no choice.”
Bellamy eyed the strange briefcase and felt a swell of fear. Is she going to torture me? He strained at his
cuffs again. “What’s in that case?!”
Sato smiled grimly. “Something that will persuade you to see things my way. I guarantee it.”
CHAPTER 81
The subterranean space in which Mal’akh performed the Art was ingeniously hidden. His home’s
basement, to those who entered, appeared quite normal—a typical cellar with boiler, fuse box, woodpile, and
a hodgepodge of storage. This visible cellar, however, was only a portion of Mal’akh’s underground space. A
sizable area had been walled off for his clandestine practices.
Mal’akh’s private work space was a suite of small rooms, each with a specialized purpose. The area’s sole
entrance was a steep ramp secretly accessible through his living room, making the area’s discovery virtually
impossible.
Tonight, as Mal’akh descended the ramp, the tattooed sigils and signs on his flesh seemed to come alive in
the cerulean glow of his basement’s specialized lighting. Moving into the bluish haze, he walked past several
closed doors and headed directly for the largest room at the end of the corridor.
The “sanctum sanctorum,” as Mal’akh liked to call it, was a perfect twelve-foot square. Twelve are the signs
of the zodiac. Twelve are the hours of the day. Twelve are the gates of heaven. In the center of the chamber
was a stone table, a seven-by-seven square. Seven are the seals of Revelation. Seven are the steps of the
Temple. Centered over the table hung a carefully calibrated light source that cycled through a spectrum of
preordained colors, completing its cycle every six hours in accordance with the sacred Table of Planetary
Hours. The hour of Yanor is blue. The hour of Nasnia is red. The hour of Salam is white.
Now was the hour of Caerra, meaning the light in the room had modulated to a soft purplish hue. Wearing
only a silken loincloth wrapped around his buttocks and neutered sex organ, Mal’akh began his preparations.
He carefully combined the suffumigation chemicals that he would later ignite to sanctify the air. Then he
folded the virgin silk robe that he would eventually don in place of his loincloth. And finally, he purified a
flask of water for the anointing of his offering. When he was done, he placed all of these prepared ingredients
on a side table.
Next he went to a shelf and retrieved a small ivory box, which he carried to the side table and placed with the
other items. Although he was not yet ready to use it, he could not resist opening the lid and admiring this
treasure.
The knife.
Inside the ivory box, nestled in a cradle of black velvet, shone the sacrificial knife that Mal’akh had been
saving for tonight. He had purchased it for $1.6 million on the Middle Eastern antiquities black market last
year.
The most famous knife in history.
Unimaginably old and believed lost, this precious blade was made of iron, attached to a bone handle. Over
the ages, it had been in the possession of countless powerful individuals. In recent decades, however, it had
disappeared, languishing in a secret private collection. Mal’akh had gone to enormous lengths to obtain it.
The knife, he suspected, had not drawn blood for decades . . . possibly centuries. Tonight, this blade would
again taste the power of the sacrifice for which it was honed.
Mal’akh gently lifted the knife from its cushioned compartment and reverently polished the blade with a silk
cloth soaked in purified water. His skills had progressed greatly since his first rudimentary experiments in
New York. The dark Art that Mal’akh practiced had been known by many names in many languages, but by
any name, it was a precise science. This primeval technology had once held the key to the portals of power,
but it had been banished long ago, relegated to the shadows of occultism and magic. Those few who still
practiced this Art were considered madmen, but Mal’akh knew better. This is not work for those with dull
faculties. The ancient dark Art, like modern science, was a discipline involving precise formulas, specific
ingredients, and meticulous timing.
This Art was not the impotent black magic of today, often practiced halfheartedly by curious souls. This Art,
like nuclear physics, had the potential to unleash enormous power. The warnings were dire: The unskilled
practitioner runs the risk of being struck by a reflux current and destroyed.
Mal’akh finished admiring the sacred blade and turned his attention to a lone sheet of thick vellum lying on
the table before him. He had made this vellum himself from the skin of a baby lamb. As was the protocol, the
lamb was pure, having not yet reached sexual maturity. Beside the vellum was a quill pen he had made from
the feather of a crow, a silver saucer, and three glimmering candles arranged around a solid-brass bowl. The
bowl contained one inch of thick crimson liquid.
The liquid was Peter Solomon’s blood.
Blood is the tincture of eternity.
Mal’akh picked up the quill pen, placed his left hand on the vellum, and dipping the quill tip in the blood, he
carefully traced the outline of his open palm. When he was done, he added the five symbols of the Ancient
Mysteries, one on each fingertip of the drawing.
The crown . . . to represent the king I shall become.
The star . . . to represent the heavens which have ordained my destiny.
The sun . . . to represent the illumination of my soul.
The lantern . . . to represent the feeble light of human understanding.
And the key . . . to represent the missing piece, that which tonight I shall at last possess.
Mal’akh completed his blood tracing and held up the vellum, admiring his work in the light of the three
candles. He waited until the blood was dry and then folded the thick vellum three times. While chanting an
ethereal ancient incantation, Mal’akh touched the vellum to the third candle, and it burst into flames. He set
the flaming vellum on the silver saucer and let it burn. As it did, the carbon in the animal skin dissolved to a
powdery black char. When the flame went out, Mal’akh carefully tapped the ashes into the brass bowl of
blood. Then he stirred the mixture with the crow’s feather.
The liquid turned a deeper crimson, nearly black.
Holding the bowl in both palms, Mal’akh raised it over his head and gave thanks, intoning the blood
eukharistos of the ancients. Then he carefully poured the blackened mixture into a glass vial and corked it.
This would be the ink with which Mal’akh would inscribe the untattooed flesh atop his head and complete
his masterpiece.
CHAPTER 82
Washington National Cathedral is the sixth-largest cathedral in the world and soars higher than a thirtystory
skyscraper. Embellished with over two hundred stained-glass windows, a fifty-three-bell carillon, and a
10,647-pipe organ, this Gothic masterpiece can accommodate more than three thousand worshippers.
Tonight, however, the great cathedral was deserted.
Reverend Colin Galloway—dean of the cathedral—looked like he had been alive forever. Stooped and
withered, he wore a simple black cassock and shuffled blindly ahead without a word. Langdon and Katherine
followed in silence through the darkness of the four-hundred-foot-long nave’s central aisle, which was
curved ever so slightly to the left to create a softening optical illusion. When they reached the Great
Crossing, the dean guided them through the rood screen—the symbolic divider between the public area and
the sanctuary beyond.
The scent of frankincense hung in the air of the chancel. This sacred space was dark, illuminated only by
indirect reflections in the foliated vaults overhead. Flags of the fifty states hung above the quire, which was
ornately appointed with several carved reredos depicting biblical events. Dean Galloway continued on,
apparently knowing this walk by heart. For a moment, Langdon thought they were headed straight for the
high altar, where the ten stones from Mount Sinai were embedded, but the old dean finally turned left and
groped his way through a discreetly hidden door that led into an administrative annex.
They moved down a short hallway to an office door bearing a brass nameplate:
THE REVEREND DR. COLIN GALLOWAY
CATHEDRAL DEAN
Galloway opened the door and turned on the lights, apparently accustomed to remembering this courtesy for
his guests. He ushered them in and closed the door.
The dean’s office was small but elegant, with high bookshelves, a desk, a carved armoire, and a private
bathroom. On the walls hung sixteenth-century tapestries and several religious paintings. The old dean
motioned to the two leather chairs directly opposite his desk. Langdon sat with Katherine and felt grateful
finally to set his heavy shoulder bag on the floor at his feet.
Sanctuary and answers, Langdon thought, settling into the comfortable chair.
The aged man shuffled around behind his desk and eased himself down into his high-backed chair. Then,
with a weary sigh, he raised his head, staring blankly out at them through clouded eyes. When he spoke, his
voice was unexpectedly clear and strong.
“I realize we have never met,” the old man said, “and yet I feel I know you both.” He took out a handkerchief
and dabbed his mouth. “Professor Langdon, I am familiar with your writings, including the clever piece you
did on the symbolism of this cathedral. And, Ms. Solomon, your brother, Peter, and I have been Masonic
brothers for many years now.”
“Peter is in terrible trouble,” Katherine said.
“So I have been told.” The old man sighed. “And I will do everything in my power to help you.”
Langdon saw no Masonic ring on the dean’s finger, and yet he knew many Masons, especially those within
the clergy, chose not to advertise their affiliation.
As they began to talk, it became clear that Dean Galloway already knew some of the night’s events from
Warren Bellamy’s phone message. As Langdon and Katherine filled him in on the rest, the dean looked more
and more troubled.
“And this man who has taken our beloved Peter,” the dean said, “he is insisting you decipher the pyramid in
exchange for Peter’s life?”
“Yes,” Langdon said. “He thinks it’s a map that will lead him to the hiding place of the Ancient Mysteries.”
The dean turned his eerie, opaque eyes toward Langdon. “My ears tell me you do not believe in such things.”
Langdon did not want to waste time going down this road. “It doesn’t matter what I believe. We need to help
Peter. Unfortunately, when we deciphered the pyramid, it pointed nowhere.”
The old man sat straighter. “You’ve deciphered the pyramid?”
Katherine interceded now, quickly explaining that despite Bellamy’s warnings and her brother’s request that
Langdon not unwrap the package, she had done so, feeling her first priority was to help her brother however
she could. She told the dean about the golden capstone, Albrecht Dürer’s magic square, and how it decrypted
the sixteen-letter Masonic cipher into the phrase Jeova Sanctus Unus.
“That’s all it says?” the dean asked. “One True God?”
“Yes, sir,” Langdon replied. “Apparently the pyramid is more of a metaphorical map than a geographic one.”
The dean held out his hands. “Let me feel it.”
Langdon unzipped his bag and pulled out the pyramid, which he carefully hoisted up on the desk, setting it
directly in front of the reverend.
Langdon and Katherine watched as the old man’s frail hands examined every inch of the stone—the
engraved side, the smooth base, and the truncated top. When he was finished, he held out his hands again.
“And the capstone?”
Langdon retrieved the small stone box, set it on the desk, and opened the lid. Then he removed the capstone
and placed it into the old man’s waiting hands. The dean performed a similar examination, feeling every
inch, pausing on the capstone’s engraving, apparently having some trouble reading the small, elegantly
inscribed text.
“‘The secret hides within The Order,’” Langdon offered. “And the words the and order are capitalized.”
The old man’s face was expressionless as he positioned the capstone on top of the pyramid and aligned it by
sense of touch. He seemed to pause a moment, as if in prayer, and reverently ran his palms over the complete
pyramid several times. Then he reached out and located the cube-shaped box, taking it in his hands, feeling it
carefully, his fingers probing inside and out.
When he was done, he set down the box and leaned back in his chair. “So tell me,” he demanded, his voice
suddenly stern. “Why have you come to me?”
The question took Langdon off guard. “We came, sir, because you told us to. And Mr. Bellamy said we
should trust you.”
“And yet you did not trust him?”
“I’m sorry?”
The dean’s white eyes stared directly through Langdon. “The package containing the capstone was sealed.
Mr. Bellamy told you not to open it,
and yet you did. In addition, Peter Solomon himself told you not to open it. And yet you did.”
“Sir,” Katherine intervened, “we were trying to help my brother. The man who has him demanded we
decipher—”
“I can appreciate that,” the dean declared, “and yet what have you achieved by opening the package?
Nothing. Peter’s captor is looking for a location, and he will not be satisfied with the answer of Jeova
Sanctus Unus.”
“I agree,” Langdon said, “but unfortunately that’s all the pyramid says. As I mentioned, the map seems to be
more figurative than—”
“You’re mistaken, Professor,” the dean said. “The Masonic Pyramid is a real map. It points to a real
location. You do not understand that, because you have not yet deciphered the pyramid fully. Not even
close.”
Langdon and Katherine exchanged startled looks.
The dean laid his hands back on the pyramid, almost caressing it. “This map, like the Ancient Mysteries
themselves, has many layers of meaning. Its true secret remains veiled from you.”
“Dean Galloway,” Langdon said, “we’ve been over every inch of the pyramid and capstone, and there’s
nothing else to see.”
“Not in its current state, no. But objects change.”
“Sir?”
“Professor, as you know, the promise of this pyramid is one of miraculous transformative power. Legend
holds that this pyramid can change its shape . . . alter its physical form to reveal its secrets. Like the famed
stone that released Excalibur into the hands of King Arthur, the Masonic Pyramid can transform itself if it so
chooses . . . and reveal its secret to the worthy.”
Langdon now sensed that the old man’s advanced years had perhaps robbed him of his faculties. “I’m sorry,
sir. Are you saying this pyramid can undergo a literal physical transformation?”
“Professor, if I were to reach out with my hand and transform this pyramid right before your eyes, would you
believe what you had witnessed?”
Langdon had no idea how to respond. “I suppose I would have no choice.”
“Very well, then. In a moment, I shall do exactly that.” He dabbed his mouth again. “Let me remind you that
there was an era when even the brightest minds perceived the earth as flat. For if the earth were round, then
surely the oceans would spill off. Imagine how they would have mocked you if you proclaimed, ‘Not only is
the world a sphere, but there is an invisible, mystical force that holds everything to its surface’!”
“There’s a difference,” Langdon said, “between the existence of gravity . . . and the ability to transform
objects with a touch of your hand.”
“Is there? Is it not possible that we are still living in the Dark Ages, still mocking the suggestion of ‘mystical’
forces that we cannot see or comprehend. History, if it has taught us anything at all, has taught us that the
strange ideas we deride today will one day be our celebrated truths. I claim I can transform this pyramid with
a touch of my finger, and you question my sanity. I would expect more from an historian. History is replete
with great minds who have all proclaimed the same thing . . . great minds who have all insisted that man
possesses mystical abilities of which he is unaware.”
Langdon knew the dean was correct. The famous Hermetic aphorism—Know ye not that ye are gods?—was
one of the pillars of the Ancient Mysteries. As above, so below . . . Man created in God’s image . . .
Apotheosis. This persistent message of man’s own divinity—of his hidden potential—was the recurring
theme in the ancient texts of countless traditions. Even the Holy Bible cried out in Psalms 82:6: Ye are gods!
“Professor,” the old man said, “I realize that you, like many educated people, live trapped between worlds—
one foot in the spiritual, one foot in the physical. Your heart yearns to believe . . . but your intellect refuses to
permit it. As an academic, you would be wise to learn from the great minds of history.” He paused and
cleared his throat. “If I’m remembering correctly, one of the greatest minds ever to live proclaimed: ‘That
which is impenetrable to us really exists. Behind the secrets of nature remains something subtle, intangible,
and inexplicable. Veneration for this force beyond anything that we can comprehend is my religion.’ ”
“Who said that?” Langdon said. “Gandhi?”
“No,” Katherine interjected. “Albert Einstein.”
Katherine Solomon had read every word Einstein had ever written and was struck by his profound respect for
the mystical, as well as his predictions that the masses would one day feel the same. The religion of the
future, Einstein had predicted, will be a cosmic religion. It will transcend personal God and avoid dogma
and theology.
Robert Langdon appeared to be struggling with the idea. Katherine could sense his rising frustration with the
old Episcopal priest, and she understood. After all, they had traveled here for answers, and they had found
instead a blind man who claimed he could transform objects with a touch of his hands. Even so, the old
man’s overt passion for mystical forces reminded Katherine of her brother.
“Father Galloway,” Katherine said, “Peter is in trouble. The CIA is chasing us. And Warren Bellamy sent us
to you for help. I don’t know what this pyramid says or where it points, but if deciphering it means that we
can help Peter, we need to do that. Mr. Bellamy may have preferred to sacrifice my brother’s life to hide this
pyramid, but my family has experienced nothing but pain because of it. Whatever secret it may hold, it ends
tonight.”
“You are correct,” the old man replied, his tone dire. “It will all end tonight. You’ve guaranteed that.” He
sighed. “Ms. Solomon, when you broke the seal on that box, you set in motion a series of events from which
there will be no return. There are forces at work tonight that you do not yet comprehend. There is no turning
back.”
Katherine stared dumbfounded at the reverend. There was something apocalyptic about his tone, as if he
were referring to the Seven Seals of Revelation or Pandora’s box.
“Respectfully, sir,” Langdon interceded, “I can’t imagine how a stone pyramid could set in motion anything
at all.”
“Of course you can’t, Professor.” The old man stared blindly through him. “You do not yet have eyes to see.”
CHAPTER 83
In the moist air of the Jungle, the Architect of the Capitol could feel the sweat now rolling down his back.
His handcuffed wrists ached, but all of his attention remained riveted on the ominous titanium briefcase that
Sato had just opened on the bench between them.
The contents of this case, Sato had told him, will persuade you to see things my way. I guarantee it.
The tiny Asian woman had unclasped the metal case away from Bellamy’s line of sight, and he had yet to see
its contents, but his imagination was running wild. Sato’s hands were doing something inside the case, and
Bellamy half expected her to extract a series of glistening, razor-sharp tools.
Suddenly a light source flickered inside the case, growing brighter, illuminating Sato’s face from beneath.
Her hands kept moving inside, and the light changed hue. After a few moments, she removed her hands,
grasped the entire case, and turned it toward Bellamy so he could see inside.
Bellamy found himself squinting into the glow of what appeared to be some kind of futuristic laptop with a
handheld phone receiver, two antennae, and a double keyboard. His initial surge of relief turned quickly to
confusion.
The screen bore the CIA logo and the text:
SECURE LOG-IN
USER: INOUE SATO
SECURITY CLEARANCE: LEVEL 5
Beneath the laptop’s log-in window, a progress icon was spinning:
ONE MOMENT PLEASE . . .
DECRYPTING FILE . . .
Bellamy’s gaze shot back up to Sato, whose eyes were locked on his. “I had not wanted to show you this,”
she said. “But you’ve left me no choice.”
The screen flickered again, and Bellamy glanced back down as the file opened, its contents filling the entire
LCD.
For several moments, Bellamy stared at the screen, trying to make sense of what he was looking at.
Gradually, as it began to dawn on him, he felt the blood draining from his face. He stared in horror, unable to
look away. “But this is . . . impossible!” he exclaimed. “How . . . could this be!”
Sato’s face was grim. “You tell me, Mr. Bellamy. You tell me.”
As the Architect of the Capitol began to fully comprehend the ramifications of what he was seeing, he could
feel his entire world teetering precariously on the brink of disaster.
My God . . . I’ve made a terrible, terrible mistake!
CHAPTER 84
Dean Galloway felt alive.
Like all mortals, he knew the time was coming when he would shed his mortal shell, but tonight was not the
night. His corporeal heart was beating strong and fast . . . and his mind felt sharp. There is work to be done.
As he ran his arthritic hands across the pyramid’s smooth surfaces, he could scarcely believe what he was
feeling. I never imagined I would live to witness this moment. For generations, the pieces of the symbolon
map had been kept safely apart from one another. Now they were united at last. Galloway wondered if this
was the foretold time.
Strangely, fate had selected two non-Masons to assemble the pyramid. Somehow, this seemed fitting. The
Mysteries are moving out of the inner circles . . . out of darkness . . . into the light.
“Professor,” he said, turning his head in the direction of Langdon’s breathing. “Did Peter tell you why he
wanted you to watch over the little package?”
“He said powerful people wanted to steal it from him,” Langdon replied.
The dean nodded. “Yes, Peter told me the same thing.”
“He did?” Katherine said suddenly on his left. “You and my brother spoke about this pyramid?”
“Of course,” Galloway said. “Your brother and I have spoken on many things. I was once the Worshipful
Master at the House of the Temple, and he comes to me for guidance at times. It was about a year ago that he
came to me, deeply troubled. He sat exactly where you are now, and he asked me if I believed in supernatural
premonitions.”
“Premonitions?” Katherine sounded concerned. “You mean like . . . visions?”
“Not exactly. It was more visceral. Peter said he was feeling the growing presence of a dark force in his life.
He sensed something was watching him . . . waiting . . . intending to do him great harm.”
“Obviously he was right,” Katherine said, “considering that the same man who killed our mother and Peter’s
son had come to Washington and become one of Peter’s own Masonic brothers.”
“True,” Langdon said, “but it doesn’t explain the involvement of the CIA.”
Galloway was not so sure. “Men in power are always interested in greater power.”
“But . . . the CIA?” Langdon challenged. “And mystical secrets? Something doesn’t add up.”
“Sure it does,” Katherine said. “The CIA thrives on technological advancement and has always experimented
with the mystical sciences—ESP, remote viewing, sensory deprivation, pharmacologically induced highly
mentalized states. It’s all the same thing—tapping the unseen potential of the human mind. If there’s one
thing I’ve learned from Peter, it’s this: Science and mysticism are very closely related, distinguishable only
by their approaches. They have identical goals . . . but different methods.”
“Peter tells me,” Galloway said, “that your field of study is a kind of modern mystical science?”
“Noetics,” Katherine said, nodding. “And it’s proving man has powers unlike anything we can imagine.” She
motioned to a stained-glass window depicting the familiar image of the “Luminous Jesus,” that of Christ with
rays of light flowing from his head and hands. “In fact, I just used a supercooled charge-coupled device to
photograph the hands of a faith healer at work. The photos looked a lot like the image of Jesus in your
stained-glass window . . . streams of energy pouring through the healer’s fingertips.”
The well-trained mind, Galloway thought, hiding a smile. How do you think Jesus healed the sick?
“I realize,” Katherine said, “that modern medicine ridicules healers and shamans, but I saw this with my own
eyes. My CCD cameras clearly photographed this man transmitting a massive energy field from his
fingertips . . . and literally changing the cellular makeup of his patient. If that’s not godlike power, then I
don’t know what is.”
Dean Galloway let himself smile. Katherine had the same fiery passion as her brother. “Peter once compared
Noetic Scientists to the early explorers who were mocked for embracing the heretical notion of a spherical
earth. Almost overnight, these explorers went from fools to heroes, discovering uncharted worlds and
expanding the horizons of everyone on the planet. Peter thinks you will do this as well. He has very high
hopes for your work. After all, every great philosophical shift in history began with a single bold idea.”
Galloway knew, of course, that one needn’t go to a lab to witness proof of this bold new idea, this proposal
of man’s untapped potential. This very cathedral held healing prayer circles for the sick, and repeatedly had
witnessed truly miraculous results, medically documented physical transformations. The question was not
whether God had imbued man with great powers . . . but rather how we liberate those powers.
The old dean placed his hands reverently around the sides of the Masonic Pyramid and spoke very quietly.
“My friends, I do not know exactly where this pyramid points . . . but I do know this. There is a great
spiritual treasure buried out there somewhere . . . a treasure that has waited patiently in darkness for
generations. I believe it is a catalyst that has the power to transform this world.” He now touched the golden
tip of the capstone. “And now that this pyramid is assembled . . . the time is fast approaching. And why
shouldn’t it? The promise of a great transformational enlightenment has been prophesied forever.”
“Father,” Langdon said, his tone challenging, “we’re all familiar with the Revelation of Saint John and the
literal meaning of the Apocalypse, but biblical prophecy hardly seems—”
“Oh, heavens, the Book of Revelation is a mess!” the dean said. “Nobody knows how to read that. I’m
talking about clear minds writing in clear language—the predictions of Saint Augustine, Sir Francis Bacon,
Newton, Einstein, the list goes on and on, all anticipating a transformative moment of enlightenment. Even
Jesus himself said, ‘Nothing is hidden that will not be made known, nor secret that will not come to light.’”
“It’s a safe prediction to make,” Langdon said. “Knowledge grows exponentially. The more we know, the
greater our ability to learn, and the faster we expand our knowledge base.”
“Yes,” Katherine added. “We see this in science all the time. Each new technology we invent becomes a tool
with which to invent new technologies . . . and it snowballs. That’s why science has advanced more in the
last five years than in the previous five thousand. Exponential growth. Mathematically, as time passes, the
exponential curve of progress becomes almost vertical, and new development occurs incredibly fast.”
Silence fell in the dean’s office, and Galloway sensed that his two guests still had no idea how this pyramid
could possibly help them reveal anything further. That is why fate brought you to me, he thought. I have a
role to play.
For many years, the Reverend Colin Galloway, along with his Masonic brothers, had played the role of
gatekeeper. Now it was all changing.
I am no longer a gatekeeper . . . I am a guide.
“Professor Langdon?” Galloway said, reaching out across his desk. “Take my hand if you will.”
Robert Langdon felt uncertain as he stared across at Dean Galloway’s outstretched palm.
Are we going to pray?
Politely, Langdon reached out and placed his right hand in the dean’s withered hand. The old man grasped it
firmly but did not begin to pray. Instead, he found Langdon’s index finger and guided it downward into the
stone box that had once housed the golden capstone.
“Your eyes have blinded you,” the dean said. “If you saw with your fingertips as I do, you would realize this
box has something left to teach you.”
Dutifully, Langdon worked his fingertip around the inside of the box, but he felt nothing. The inside was
perfectly smooth.
“Keep looking,” Galloway prompted.
Finally, Langdon’s fingertip felt something—a tiny raised circle—a minuscule dot in the center of the base of
the box. He removed his hand and peered inside. The little circle was virtually invisible to the naked eye.
What is that?
“Do you recognize that symbol?” Galloway asked.
“Symbol?” Langdon replied. “I can barely see anything at all.”
“Push down on it.”
Langdon did as he asked, pressing his fingertip down onto the spot. What does he think will happen?
“Hold your finger down,” the dean said. “Apply pressure.”
Langdon glanced over at Katherine, who looked puzzled as she tucked a wisp of hair behind her ears.
A few seconds later, the old dean finally nodded. “Okay, remove your hand. The alchemy is complete.”
Alchemy? Robert Langdon removed his hand from the stone box and sat in bewildered silence. Nothing had
changed at all. The box just sat there on the desk.
“Nothing,” Langdon said.
“Look at your fingertip,” the dean replied. “You should see a transformation.”
Langdon looked at his finger, but the only transformation he could see was that he now had an indentation on
his skin made by the circular nubbin—a tiny circle with a dot in the middle.
“Now do you recognize this symbol?” the dean asked.
Although Langdon recognized the symbol, he was more impressed that the dean had been able to feel the
detail of it. Seeing with one’s fingertips was apparently a learned skill.
“It’s alchemical,” Katherine said, sliding her chair closer and examining Langdon’s finger. “It’s the ancient
symbol for gold.”
“Indeed it is.” The dean smiled and patted the box. “Professor, congratulations. You have just achieved what
every alchemist in history has strived for. From a worthless substance, you’ve created gold.”
Langdon frowned, unimpressed. The little parlor trick seemed to be no help at all. “An interesting idea, sir,
but I’m afraid this symbol—a circle with a round dot in the middle—has dozens of meanings. It’s called a
circumpunct, and it’s one of the most widely used symbols in history.”
“What are you talking about?” the dean asked, sounding skeptical.
Langdon was stunned that a Mason was not more familiar with the spiritual importance of this symbol. “Sir,
the circumpunct has countless meanings. In ancient Egypt, it was the symbol for Ra—the sun god—and
modern astronomy still uses it as the solar symbol. In Eastern philosophy, it represents the spiritual insight of
the Third Eye, the divine rose, and the sign of illumination. The Kabbalists use it to symbolize the Kether—
the highest Sephiroth and ‘the most hidden of all hidden things.’ Early mystics called it the Eye of God and
it’s the origin of the All-Seeing Eye on the Great Seal. The Pythagoreans used the circumpunct as the symbol
of the Monad—the Divine Truth, the Prisca Sapientia, the at-one-ment of mind and soul, and the—”
“Enough!” Dean Galloway was chuckling now. “Professor, thank you. You are correct, of course.”
Langdon now realized he had just been played. He knew all that.
“The circumpunct,” Galloway said, still smiling to himself, “is essentially the symbol of the Ancient
Mysteries. For this reason, I would suggest that its presence in this box is not mere coincidence. Legend
holds that the secrets of this map are hidden in the smallest of details.”
“Fine,” Katherine said, “but even if this symbol was inscribed there intentionally, it doesn’t bring us any
closer to deciphering the map, does it?”
“You mentioned earlier that the wax seal you broke was embossed with Peter’s ring?”
“That’s correct.”
“And you said you have that ring with you?”
“I do.” Langdon reached into his pocket, found the ring, took it out of the plastic bag, and placed it on the
desk in front of the dean.
Galloway picked up the ring and began feeling its surfaces. “This unique ring was created at the same time as
the Masonic Pyramid, and traditionally, it is worn by the Mason in charge of protecting the pyramid.
Tonight, when I felt the tiny circumpunct on the bottom of the stone box, I realized that the ring is, in fact,
part of the symbolon.”
“It is?”
“I’m certain of it. Peter is my closest friend, and he wore this ring for many years. I am quite familiar with
it.” He handed the ring to Langdon. “See for yourself.”
Langdon took the ring and examined it, running his fingers over the double-headed phoenix, the number 33,
the words ORDO AB CHAO, and also the words All is revealed at the thirty-third degree. He felt nothing
helpful. Then, as his fingers traced down around the outside of the band, he stopped short. Startled, he turned
the ring over and eyed the very bottom of its band.
“Did you find it?” Galloway said.
“I think so, yes!” Langdon said.
Katherine slid her chair closer. “What?”
“The degree sign on the band,” Langdon said, showing her. “It’s so small that you don’t really notice it with
your eyes, but if you feel it, you can tell it’s actually indented—like a tiny circular incision.” The degree sign
was centered on the bottom of the band . . . and admittedly looked to be the same size as the raised nubbin in
the bottom of the cube.
“Is it the same size?” Katherine moved closer still, sounding excited now.
“There’s one way to find out.” He took the ring and lowered it into the box, aligning the two tiny circles. As
he pushed down, the raised circle on the box slid into the ring’s opening, and there was a faint but decisive
click.
They all jumped.
Langdon waited, but nothing happened.
“What was that?!” the priest said.
“Nothing,” Katherine replied. “The ring locked into place . . . but nothing else happened.”
“No great transformation?” Galloway looked puzzled.
We’re not done, Langdon realized, gazing down at the ring’s embossed insignia—a double-headed phoenix
and the number 33. All is revealed at the thirty-third degree. His mind filled with thoughts of Pythagoras,
sacred geometry, and angles; he wondered if perhaps degrees had a mathematical meaning.
Slowly, heart beating faster now, he reached down and grasped the ring, which was affixed to the base of the
cube. Then, slowly, he began turning the ring to the right. All is revealed at the thirty-third degree.
He turned the ring ten degrees . . . twenty degrees . . . thirty degrees—
What happened next, Langdon never saw coming.
CHAPTER 85
Transformation.
Dean Galloway heard it happen, and so he didn’t need to see it.
Across the desk from him, Langdon and Katherine were dead silent, no doubt staring in mute astonishment at
the stone cube, which had just transformed itself loudly before their very eyes.
Galloway couldn’t help but smile. He had anticipated the result, and although he still had no idea how this
development would ultimately help them solve the riddle of the pyramid, he was enjoying the rare chance to
teach a Harvard symbologist something about symbols.
“Professor,” the dean said, “few people realize that the Masons venerate the shape of the cube—or ashlar, as
we call it—because it is a three-dimensional representation of another symbol . . . a much older, twodimensional
symbol.” Galloway didn’t need to ask if the professor recognized the ancient symbol now lying
before them on the desk. It was one of the most famous symbols in the world.
Robert Langdon’s thoughts churned as he stared at the transformed box on the desk in front of him. I had no
idea . . .
Moments ago, he had reached into the stone box, grasped the Masonic ring, and gently turned it. As he
rotated the ring through thirty-three degrees, the cube had suddenly changed before his eyes. The square
panels that made up the sides of the box fell away from one another as their hidden hinges released. The box
collapsed all at once, its side panels and lid falling outward, slapping loudly on the desk.
The cube becomes a cross, Langdon thought. Symbolic alchemy.
Katherine looked bewildered by the sight of the collapsed cube. “The Masonic Pyramid relates to . . .
Christianity?”
For a moment, Langdon had wondered the same thing. After all, the Christian crucifix was a respected
symbol within the Masons, and certainly there were plenty of Christian Masons. However, Masons were also
Jews, Muslims, Buddhists, Hindus, and those who had no name for their God. The presence of an exclusively
Christian symbol seemed restrictive. Then the true meaning of this symbol had dawned on him.
“It’s not a crucifix,” Langdon said, standing up now. “The cross with the circumpunct in the middle is a
binary symbol—two symbols fused to create one.”
“What are you saying?” Katherine’s eyes followed him as he paced the room.
“The cross,” Langdon said, “was not a Christian symbol until the fourth century. Long before that, it was
used by the Egyptians to represent the intersection of two dimensions—the human and the celestial. As
above, so below. It was a visual representation of the juncture where man and God become one.”
“Okay.”
“The circumpunct,” Langdon said, “we already know has many meanings—one of its most esoteric being the
rose, the alchemical symbol for perfection. But, when you place a rose on the center of a cross, you create
another symbol entirely—the Rose Cross.”
Galloway reclined in his chair, smiling. “My, my. Now you’re cooking.”
Katherine stood now, too. “What am I missing?”
“The Rose Cross,” Langdon explained, “is a common symbol in Freemasonry. In fact, one of the degrees of
the Scottish Rite is called ‘Knights of the Rose Cross’ and honors the early Rosicrucians, who contributed to
Masonic mystical philosophy. Peter may have mentioned the Rosicrucians to you. Dozens of great scientists
were members—John Dee, Elias Ashmole, Robert Fludd—”
“Absolutely,” Katherine said. “I’ve read all of the Rosicrucian manifestos in my research.”
Every scientist should, Langdon thought. The Order of the Rose Cross—or more formally the Ancient and
Mystical Order Rosae Crucis—had an enigmatic history that had greatly influenced science and closely
paralleled the legend of the Ancient Mysteries . . . early sages possessing secret wisdom that was passed
down through the ages and studied by only the brightest minds. Admittedly, history’s list of famous
Rosicrucians was a who’s who of European Renaissance luminaries: Paracelsus, Bacon, Fludd, Descartes,
Pascal, Spinoza, Newton, Leibniz.
According to Rosicrucian doctrine, the order was “built on esoteric truths of the ancient past,” truths which
had to be “concealed from the average man” and which promised great insight into “the spiritual realm.” The
brotherhood’s symbol had blossomed over the years into a flowering rose on an ornate cross, but it had
begun as a more modest dotted circle on an unadorned cross—the simplest manifestation of the rose on the
simplest manifestation of the cross.
“Peter and I often discuss Rosicrucian philosophy,” Galloway told Katherine.
As the dean began outlining the interrelationship between Masonry and Rosicrucianism, Langdon felt his
attention drawn back to the same nagging thought he’d had all night. Jeova Sanctus Unus. This phrase is
linked to alchemy somehow. He still could not remember exactly what Peter had told him about the phrase,
but for some reason, the mention of Rosicrucianism seemed to have rekindled the thought. Think, Robert!
“The Rosicrucian founder,” Galloway was saying, “was allegedly a German mystic who went by the name
Christian Rosenkreuz—a pseudonym obviously, perhaps even for Francis Bacon, who some historians
believe founded the group himself, although there is no proof of—”
“A pseudonym!” Langdon declared suddenly, startling even himself. “That’s it! Jeova Sanctus Unus! It’s a
pseudonym!”
“What are you talking about?” Katherine demanded.
Langdon’s pulse had quickened now. “All night, I’ve been trying to remember what Peter told me about
Jeova Sanctus Unus and its relationship to alchemy. Finally I remembered! It’s not about alchemy so much
as about an alchemist! A very famous alchemist!”
Galloway chuckled. “It’s about time, Professor. I mentioned his name twice and also the word pseudonym.”
Langdon stared at the old dean. “You knew?”
“Well, I had my suspicions when you told me the engraving said Jeova Sanctus Unus and had been
decrypted using Dürer’s alchemical magic square, but when you found the Rose Cross, I was certain. As you
probably know, the personal papers of the scientist in question included a very heavily annotated copy of the
Rosicrucian manifestos.”
“Who?” Katherine asked.
“One of the world’s greatest scientists!” Langdon replied. “He was an alchemist, a member of the Royal
Society of London, a Rosicrucian, and he signed some of his most secretive science papers with a
pseudonym—‘Jeova Sanctus Unus’!”
“One True God?” Katherine said. “Modest guy.”
“Brilliant guy, actually,” Galloway corrected. “He signed his name that way because, like the ancient Adepts,
he understood himself as divine. In addition, because the sixteen letters in Jeova Sanctus Unus could be
rearranged to spell his name in Latin, making it a perfect pseudonym.”
Katherine now looked puzzled. “Jeova Sanctus Unus is an anagram of a famous alchemist’s name in Latin?”
Langdon grabbed a piece of paper and pencil off the dean’s desk, writing as he talked. “Latin interchanges
the letters J for I and the letter V for U, which means Jeova Sanctus Unus can actually be perfectly
rearranged to spell this man’s name.”
Langdon wrote down sixteen letters: Isaacus Neutonuus.
He handed the slip of paper to Katherine and said, “I think you’ve heard of him.”
“Isaac Newton?” Katherine demanded, looking at the paper. “That’s what the engraving on the pyramid was
trying to tell us!”
For a moment, Langdon was back in Westminster Abbey, standing at Newton’s pyramidical tomb, where he
had experienced a similar epiphany. And tonight, the great scientist surfaces again. It was no coincidence, of
course . . . the pyramids, mysteries, science, hidden knowledge . . . it was all intertwined. Newton’s name had
always been a recurring guidepost for those seeking secret knowledge.
“Isaac Newton,” Galloway said, “must have something to do with how to decipher the meaning of the
pyramid. I can’t imagine what it would be, but—”
“Genius!” Katherine exclaimed, her eyes going wide. “That’s how we transform the pyramid!”
“You understand?” Langdon said.
“Yes!” she said. “I can’t believe we didn’t see it! It has been staring us right in the face. A simple alchemical
process. I can transform this pyramid using basic science! Newtonian science!”
Langdon strained to understand.
“Dean Galloway,” Katherine said. “If you read the ring, it says—”
“Stop!” The old dean suddenly raised his finger in the air and motioned for silence. Gently, he cocked his
head to the side, as if he were listening to something. After a moment, he stood up abruptly. “My friends, this
pyramid obviously has secrets left to reveal. I don’t know what Ms. Solomon is getting at, but if she knows
your next step, then I have played my role. Pack up your things and say no more to me. Leave me in darkness
for the moment. I would prefer to have no information to share should our visitors try to force me.”
“Visitors?” Katherine said, listening. “I don’t hear anyone.”
“You will,” Galloway said, heading for the door. “Hurry.”
Across town, a cell tower was attempting to contact a phone that lay in pieces on Massachusetts Avenue.
Finding no signal, it redirected the call to voice mail.
“Robert!” Warren Bellamy’s panicked voice shouted. “Where are you?! Call me! Something terrible is
happening!”
CHAPTER 86
In the cerulean glow of his basement lights, Mal’akh stood at the stone table and continued his preparations.
As he worked, his empty stomach growled. He paid no heed. His days of servitude to the whims of his flesh
were behind him.
Transformation requires sacrifice.
Like many of history’s most spiritually evolved men, Mal’akh had committed to his path by making the
noblest of flesh sacrifices. Castration had been less painful than he had imagined. And, he had learned, far
more common. Every year, thousands of men underwent surgical gelding—orchiectomy, as the process was
known—their motivations ranging from transgender issues, to curbing sexual addictions, to deep-seated
spiritual beliefs. For Mal’akh, the reasons were of the highest nature. Like the mythological self-castrated
Attis, Mal’akh knew that achieving immortality required a clean break with the material world of male and
female.
The androgyne is one.
Nowadays, eunuchs were shunned, although the ancients understood the inherent power of this
transmutational sacrifice. Even the early Christians had heard Jesus Himself extol its virtues in Matthew
19:12: “There are those who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. He who
is able to accept this, let him accept it.”
Peter Solomon had made a flesh sacrifice, although a single hand was a small price in the grand scheme. By
night’s end, however, Solomon would be sacrificing much, much more.
In order to create, I must destroy.
Such was the nature of polarity.
Peter Solomon, of course, deserved the fate that awaited him tonight. It would be a fitting end. Long ago, he
had played the pivotal role in Mal’akh’s mortal life path. For this reason, Peter had been chosen to play the
pivotal role in Mal’akh’s great transformation. This man had earned all the horror and pain he was about to
endure. Peter Solomon was not the man the world believed he was.
He sacrificed his own son.
Peter Solomon had once presented his son, Zachary, with an impossible choice—wealth or wisdom. Zachary
chose poorly. The boy’s decision had begun a chain of events that eventually dragged the young man into the
depths of hell. Soganlik Prison. Zachary Solomon had died in that Turkish prison. The whole world knew the
story . . . but what they didn’t know was that Peter Solomon could have saved his son.
I was there, Mal’akh thought. I heard it all.
Mal’akh had never forgotten that night. Solomon’s brutal decision had meant the end of his son, Zach, but it
had been the birth of Mal’akh.
Some must die that others may live.
As the light over Mal’akh’s head began changing color again, he realized the hour was late. He completed his
preparations and headed back up the ramp. It was time to attend to matters of the mortal world.
CHAPTER 87
All is revealed at the thirty-third degree, Katherine thought as she ran. I know how to transform the pyramid!
The answer had been right in front of them all night.
Katherine and Langdon were alone now, dashing through the cathedral’s annex, following signs for “The
Garth.” Now, exactly as the dean had promised, they burst out of the cathedral into a massive, walled-in
courtyard.
The cathedral garth was a cloistered, pentagonal garden with a bronze postmodern fountain. Katherine was
amazed how loudly the fountain’s flowing water seemed to be reverberating in the courtyard. Then she
realized it was not the fountain she was hearing.
“Helicopter!” she shouted as a beam of light pierced the night sky above them. “Get under that portico!”
The dazzling glare of a searchlight flooded the garth just as Langdon and Katherine reached the other side,
slipping beneath a Gothic arch into a tunnel that led to the outside lawn. They waited, huddled in the tunnel,
as the helicopter passed overhead and began circling the cathedral in wide arcs.
“I guess Galloway was right about hearing visitors,” Katherine said, impressed. Bad eyes make for great
ears. Her own ears now pounded rhythmically with her racing pulse.
“This way,” Langdon said, clutching his daybag and moving through the passage.
Dean Galloway had given them a single key and a clear set of directions. Unfortunately, when they reached
the end of the short tunnel, they found themselves separated from their destination by a wide-open expanse of
lawn, currently flooded with light from the helicopter overhead.
“We can’t get across,” Katherine said.
“Hold on . . . look.” Langdon pointed to a black shadow that was materializing on the lawn to their left. The
shadow began as an amorphous blob, but it was growing quickly, moving in their direction, becoming more
defined, rushing at them faster and faster, stretching, and finally transforming itself into a massive black
rectangle crowned by two impossibly tall spires.
“The cathedral facade is blocking the searchlight,” Langdon said.
“They’re landing out in front!”
Langdon grabbed Katherine’s hand. “Run! Now!”
Inside the cathedral, Dean Galloway felt a lightness in his step that he had not felt in years. He moved
through the Great Crossing, down the nave toward the narthex and the front doors.
He could hear the helicopter hovering in front of the cathedral now, and he imagined its lights coming
through the rose window in front of him, throwing spectacular colors all over the sanctuary. He recalled the
days when he could see color. Ironically, the lightless void that had become his world had illuminated many
things for him. I see more clearly now than ever.
Galloway had been called to God as a young man and over his lifetime had loved the church as much as any
man could. Like many of his colleagues who had given their lives in earnest to God, Galloway was weary.
He had spent his life straining to be heard above the din of ignorance.
What did I expect?
From the Crusades, to the Inquisition, to American politics—the name Jesus had been hijacked as an ally in
all kinds of power struggles. Since the beginning of time, the ignorant had always screamed the loudest,
herding the unsuspecting masses and forcing them to do their bidding. They defended their worldly desires
by citing Scripture they did not understand. They celebrated their intolerance as proof of their convictions.
Now, after all these years, mankind had finally managed to utterly erode everything that had once been so
beautiful about Jesus.
Tonight, encountering the symbol of the Rose Cross had fueled him with great hope, reminding him of the
prophecies written in the Rosicrucian manifestos, which Galloway had read countless times in the past and
could still recall.
Chapter One: Jehova will redeem humanity by revealing those secrets which he previously reserved only for
the elect.
Chapter Four: The whole world shall become as one book and all the contradictions of science and theology
shall be reconciled.
Chapter Seven: Before the end of the world, God shall create a great flood of spiritual light to alleviate the
suffering of humankind.
Chapter Eight: Before this revelation is possible, the world must sleep away the intoxication of her poisoned
chalice, which was filled with the false life of the theological vine.
Galloway knew the church had long ago lost her way, and he had dedicated his life to righting her course.
Now, he realized, the moment was fast approaching.
It is always darkest before the dawn.
CIA field agent Turner Simkins was perched on the strut of the Sikorsky helicopter as it touched down on the
frosty grass. He leaped off, joined by his men, and immediately waved the chopper back up into the air to
keep an eye on all the exits.
Nobody leaves this building.
As the chopper rose back into the night sky, Simkins and his team ran up the stairs to the cathedral’s main
entrance. Before he could decide which of the six doors to pound on, one of them swung open.
“Yes?” a calm voice said from the shadows.
Simkins could barely make out the hunched figure in priest’s robes. “Are you Dean Colin Galloway?”
“I am,” the old man replied.
“I’m looking for Robert Langdon. Have you seen him?”
The old man stepped forward now, staring past Simkins with eerie blank eyes. “Now, wouldn’t that be a
miracle.”
CHAPTER 88
Time is running out.
Security analyst Nola Kaye was already on edge, and the third mug of coffee she was now drinking had
begun coursing through her like an electric current.
No word yet from Sato.
Finally, her phone rang, and Nola leaped on it. “OS,” she answered. “Nola here.”
“Nola, it’s Rick Parrish in systems security.”
Nola slumped. No Sato. “Hi, Rick. What can I do for you?”
“I wanted to give you a heads-up—our department may have information relevant to what you’re working on
tonight.”
Nola set down her coffee. How the hell do you know what I’m working on tonight? “I beg your pardon?”
“Sorry, it’s the new CI program we’re beta-testing,” Parrish said. “It keeps flagging your workstation
number.”
Nola now realized what he was talking about. The Agency was currently running a new piece of
“collaborative integration” software designed to provide real-time alerts to disparate CIA departments when
they happened to be processing related data fields. In an era of time-sensitive terrorist threats, the key to
thwarting disaster was often as simple as a heads-up telling you that the guy down the hall was analyzing the
very data you needed. As far as Nola was concerned, this CI software had proven more of a distraction than
any real help—constant interruption software, she called it.
“Right, I forgot,” Nola said. “What have you got?” She was positive that nobody else in the building knew
about this crisis, much less could be working on it. The only computer work Nola had done tonight was
historical research for Sato on esoteric Masonic topics. Nonetheless, she was obliged to play the game.
“Well, it’s probably nothing,” Parrish said, “but we stopped a hacker tonight, and the CI program keeps
suggesting I share the information with you.”
A hacker? Nola sipped her coffee. “I’m listening.”
“About an hour ago,” Parrish said, “we snagged a guy named Zoubianis trying to access a file on one of our
internal databases. This guy claims it was a job for hire and that he has no idea why he was being paid to
access this particular file or even that it was on a CIA server.”
“Okay.”
“We finished questioning him, and he’s clean. But here’s the weird thing—the same file he was targeting had
been flagged earlier tonight by an internal search engine. It looks like someone piggybacked into our system,
ran a specific keyword search, and generated a redaction. The thing is, the keywords they used are really
strange. And there’s one in particular that the CI flagged as a high-priority match—one that’s unique to both
of our data sets.” He paused. “Do you know the word . . . symbolon?”
Nola jolted upright, spilling coffee on her desk.
“The other keywords are just as unusual,” Parrish continued. “Pyramid, portal—”
“Get down here,” Nola commanded, mopping up her desk. “And bring everything you’ve got!”
“These words actually mean something to you?”
“NOW!”
CHAPTER 89
Cathedral College is an elegant, castlelike edifice located adjacent to the National Cathedral. The College of
Preachers, as it was originally envisioned by the first Episcopal bishop of Washington, was founded to
provide ongoing education for clergy after their ordination. Today, the college offers a wide variety of
programs on theology, global justice, healing, and spirituality.
Langdon and Katherine had made the dash across the lawn and used Galloway’s key to slip inside just as the
helicopter rose back over the cathedral, its floodlights turning night back into day. Now, standing breathless
inside the foyer, they surveyed their surroundings. The windows provided sufficient illumination, and
Langdon saw no reason to turn the lights on and take a chance of broadcasting their whereabouts to the
helicopter overhead. As they moved down the central hallway, they passed a series of conference halls,
classrooms, and sitting areas. The interior reminded Langdon of the neo-Gothic buildings of Yale
University—breathtaking on the outside, and yet surprisingly utilitarian on the inside, their period elegance
having been retrofitted to endure heavy foot traffic.
“Down here,” Katherine said, motioning toward the far end of the hall.
Katherine had yet to share with Langdon her new revelation regarding the pyramid, but apparently the
reference to Isaacus Neutonuus had sparked it. All she had said as they crossed the lawn was that the pyramid
could be transformed using simple science. Everything she needed, she believed, could probably be found in
this building. Langdon had no idea what she needed or how Katherine intended to transform a solid piece of
granite or gold, but considering he had just witnessed a cube metamorphose into a Rosicrucian cross, he was
willing to have faith.
They reached the end of the hall and Katherine frowned, apparently not seeing what she wanted. “You said
this building has dormitory facilities?”
“Yes, for residential conferences.”
“So they must have a kitchen in here somewhere, right?”
“You’re hungry?”
She frowned back at him. “No, I need a lab.”
Of course you do. Langdon spotted a descending staircase that bore a promising symbol. America’s favorite
pictogram.
The basement kitchen was industrial looking—lots of stainless steel and big bowls—clearly designed to cook
for large groups. The kitchen had no windows. Katherine closed the door and flipped on the lights. The
exhaust fans came on automatically.
She began rooting around in the cupboards for whatever it was she needed. “Robert,” she directed, “put the
pyramid out on the island, if you would.”
Feeling like the novice sous chef taking orders from Daniel Boulud, Langdon did as he was told, removing
the pyramid from his bag and placing the gold capstone on top of it. When he finished, Katherine was busy
filling an enormous pot with hot tap water.
“Would you please lift this to the stove for me?”
Langdon heaved the sloshing pot onto the stove as Katherine turned on the gas burner and cranked up the
flame.
“Are we doing lobsters?” he asked hopefully.
“Very funny. No, we’re doing alchemy. And for the record, this is a pasta pot, not a lobster pot.” She pointed
to the perforated strainer insert that she had removed from the pot and placed on the island beside the
pyramid.
Silly me. “And boiling pasta is going to help us decipher the pyramid?”
Katherine ignored the comment, her tone turning serious. “As I’m sure you know, there is a historical and
symbolic reason the Masons chose thirty-three as their highest degree.”
“Of course,” Langdon said. In the days of Pythagoras, six centuries before Christ, the tradition of numerology
hailed the number 33 as the highest of all the Master Numbers. It was the most sacred figure, symbolizing
Divine Truth. The tradition lived on within the Masons . . . and elsewhere. It was no coincidence that
Christians were taught that Jesus was crucified at age thirty-three, despite no real historical evidence to that
effect. Nor was it coincidence that Joseph was said to have been
thirty-three when he married the Virgin Mary, or that Jesus accomplished thirty-three miracles, or that God’s
name was mentioned thirty-three times in Genesis, or that, in Islam, all the dwellers of heaven were
permanently thirty-three years old.
“Thirty-three,” Katherine said, “is a sacred number in many mystical traditions.”
“Correct.” Langdon still had no idea what this had to do with a pasta pot.
“So it should come as no surprise to you that an early alchemist, Rosicrucian, and mystic like Isaac Newton
also considered the number thirty-three special.”
“I’m sure he did,” Langdon replied. “Newton was deep into numerology, prophecy, and astrology, but what
does—”
“All is revealed at the thirty-third degree.”
Langdon pulled Peter’s ring from his pocket and read the inscription. Then he glanced back at the pot of
water. “Sorry, you lost me.”
“Robert, earlier tonight, we all assumed ‘thirty-third degree’ referred to the Masonic degree, and yet when
we rotated that ring thirty-three degrees, the cube transformed and revealed a cross. At that moment, we
realized the word degree was being used in another sense.”
“Yes. Degrees of arc.”
“Exactly. But degree has a third meaning as well.”
Langdon eyed the pot of water on the stove. “Temperature.”
“Exactly!” she said. “It was right in front of us all night. ‘All is revealed at the thirty-third degree.’ If we
bring this pyramid’s temperature to thirty-three degrees . . . it may just reveal something.”
Langdon knew Katherine Solomon was exceptionally bright, and yet she seemed to be missing a rather
obvious point. “If I’m not mistaken, thirty-three degrees is almost freezing. Shouldn’t we be putting the
pyramid in the freezer?”
Katherine smiled. “Not if we want to follow the recipe written by the great alchemist and Rosicrucian mystic
who signed his papers Jeova Sanctus Unus.”
Isaacus Neutonuus wrote recipes?
“Robert, temperature is the fundamental alchemical catalyst, and it was not always measured in Fahrenheit
and Celsius. There are far older temperature scales, one of them invented by Isaac—”
“The Newton Scale!” Langdon said, realizing she was right.
“Yes! Isaac Newton invented an entire system of quantifying temperature based entirely on natural
phenomena. The temperature of melting
ice was Newton’s base point, and he called it ‘the zeroth degree.’ ” She paused. “I suppose you can guess
what degree he assigned the temperature of boiling water—the king of all alchemical processes?”
“Thirty-three.”
“Yes, thirty-three! The thirty-third degree. On the Newton Scale, the temperature of boiling water is thirtythree
degrees. I remember asking my brother once why Newton chose that number. I mean, it seemed so
random. Boiling water is the most fundamental alchemical process, and he chose thirty-three? Why not a
hundred? Why not something more elegant? Peter explained that, to a mystic like Isaac Newton, there was no
number more elegant than thirty-three.”
All is revealed at the thirty-third degree. Langdon glanced at the pot of water and then over at the pyramid.
“Katherine, the pyramid is made out of solid granite and solid gold. Do you really think boiling water is hot
enough to transform it?”
The smile on her face told Langdon that Katherine knew something he did not know. Confidently, she
walked over to the island, lifted the gold-capped, granite pyramid, and set it in the strainer. Then she
carefully lowered it into the bubbling water. “Let’s find out, shall we?”
High above the National Cathedral, the CIA pilot locked the helicopter in auto-hover mode and surveyed the
perimeter of the building and the grounds. No movement. His thermal imaging couldn’t penetrate the
cathedral stone, and so he couldn’t tell what the team was doing inside, but if anyone tried to slip out, the
thermal would pick it up.
It was sixty seconds later that a thermal sensor pinged. Working on the same principle as home-security
systems, the detector had identified a strong temperature differential. Usually this meant a human form
moving through a cool space, but what appeared on the monitor was more of a thermal cloud, a patch of hot
air drifting across the lawn. The pilot found the source, an active vent on the side of Cathedral College.
Probably nothing, he thought. He saw these kinds of gradients all the time. Someone cooking or doing
laundry. As he was about to turn away, though, he realized something odd. There were no cars in the parking
lot and no lights on anywhere in the building.
He studied the UH-60’s imaging system for a long moment. Then he radioed down to his team leader.
“Simkins, it’s probably nothing, but . . .”
“Incandescent temperature indicator!” Langdon had to admit, it was clever.
“It’s simple science,” Katherine said. “Different substances incandesce at different temperatures. We call
them thermal markers. Science uses these markers all the time.”
Langdon gazed down at the submerged pyramid and capstone. Wisps of steam were beginning to curl over
the bubbling water, although he was not feeling hopeful. He glanced at his watch, and his heart rate
accelerated: 11:45 P.M. “You believe something here will luminesce as it heats up?”
“Not luminesce, Robert. Incandesce. There’s a big difference. Incandescence is caused by heat, and it occurs
at a specific temperature. For example, when steel manufacturers temper beams, they spray a grid on them
with a transparent coating that incandesces at a specific target temperature so they know when the beams are
done. Think of a mood ring. Just put it on your finger, and it changes color from body heat.”
“Katherine, this pyramid was built in the 1800s! I can understand a craftsman making hidden release hinges
in a stone box, but applying some kind of transparent thermal coating?”
“Perfectly feasible,” she said, glancing hopefully at the submerged pyramid. “The early alchemists used
organic phosphors all the time as thermal markers. The Chinese made colored fireworks, and even the
Egyptians—” Katherine stopped midsentence, staring intently into the roiling water.
“What?” Langdon followed her gaze into the turbulent water but saw nothing at all.
Katherine leaned in, staring more intently into the water. Suddenly she turned and ran across the kitchen
toward the door.
“Where are you going?” Langdon shouted.
She slid to a stop at the kitchen light switch, flipped it off. The lights and exhaust fan went off, plunging the
room into total darkness and silence. Langdon turned back to the pyramid and peered through the steam at
the capstone beneath the water. By the time Katherine made it back to his side, his mouth had fallen open in
disbelief.
Exactly as Katherine had predicted, a small section of the metal capstone was starting to glow beneath the
water. Letters were starting to appear, and they were getting brighter as the water heated up.
“Text!” Katherine whispered.
Langdon nodded, dumbstruck. The glowing words were materializing just beneath the engraved inscription
on the capstone. It looked like only three words, and although Langdon could not yet read what the words
said, he wondered if they would unveil everything they had been looking for tonight. The pyramid is a real
map, Galloway had told them, and it points to a real location.
As the letters shone brighter, Katherine turned off the gas, and the water slowly stopped churning. The
capstone now came into focus beneath the water’s calm surface.
Three shining words were clearly legible.
CHAPTER 90
In the dim light of the Cathedral College kitchen, Langdon and Katherine stood over the pot of water and
stared at the transformed capstone beneath the surface. On the side of the golden capstone, an incandescent
message was glowing.
Langdon read the shining text, scarcely able to believe his eyes. He knew the pyramid was rumored to reveal
a specific location . . . but he had never imagined that the location would be quite this specific.
Eight Franklin Square
“A street address,” he whispered, stunned.
Katherine looked equally amazed. “I don’t know what’s there, do you?”
Langdon shook his head. He knew Franklin Square was one of the older sections of Washington, but he
wasn’t familiar with the address. He looked at the tip of the capstone, and read downward, taking in the
entire text.
The
secret hides
within The Order
Eight Franklin Square
Is there some kind of Order on Franklin Square?
Is there a building that hides the opening to a deep spiral staircase?
Whether or not there was actually something buried at that address, Langdon had no idea. The important
issue at this point was that he and Katherine had deciphered the pyramid and now possessed the information
required to negotiate Peter’s release.
And not a moment too soon.
The glowing arms on Langdon’s Mickey Mouse watch indicated that they had less than ten minutes to spare.
“Make the call,” Katherine said, motioning to a phone on the wall in the kitchen. “Now!”
The sudden arrival of this moment startled Langdon, and he found himself hesitating.
“Are we sure about this?”
“I most certainly am.”
“I’m not telling him anything until we know Peter is safe.”
“Of course not. You remember the number, right?”
Langdon nodded and made his way over to the kitchen phone. He lifted the receiver and dialed the man’s
cell-phone number. Katherine came over and placed her head next to his so she could listen in. As the line
began to ring, Langdon prepared himself for the eerie whisper of the man who had tricked him earlier
tonight.
Finally, the call connected.
There was no greeting, though. No voice. Only the sound of breathing at the other end.
Langdon waited and then finally spoke. “I have the information you want, but if you want it, you’ll have to
give us Peter.”
“Who is this?” a woman’s voice replied.
Langdon jumped. “Robert Langdon,” he said reflexively. “Who are you?” For an instant he thought he must
have dialed incorrectly.
“Your name is Langdon?” The woman sounded surprised. “There’s someone here asking for you.”
What? “I’m sorry, who is this?”
“Officer Paige Montgomery with Preferred Security.” Her voice seemed shaky. “Maybe you can help us with
this. About an hour ago, my partner responded to a 911 call in Kalorama Heights . . . a possible hostage
situation. I lost all contact with her, and so I called backup and came to check the residence. We found my
partner dead in the backyard. The home owner was gone, and so we broke in. A cell phone was ringing on
the hall table, and I—”
“You’re inside?” Langdon demanded.
“Yes, and the 911 tip . . . was a good one,” the woman stammered. “Sorry if I sound rattled, but my partner’s
dead, and we found a man being held here against his will. He’s in bad shape, and we’re working on him
now. He’s been asking for two people—one named Langdon and one named Katherine.”
“That’s my brother!” Katherine blurted into the receiver, pressing her head closer to Langdon’s. “I made the
911 call! Is he okay?!”
“Actually, ma’am, he’s . . .” The woman’s voice cracked. “He’s in bad shape. He’s missing his right hand . .
.”
“Please,” Katherine urged. “I want to talk to him!”
“They’re working on him at the moment. He’s in and out of consciousness. If you’re anywhere in the area,
you should get over here. He obviously wants to see you.”
“We’re about six minutes away!” Katherine said.
“Then I suggest you hurry.” There was a muffled noise in the background, and the woman then returned to
the line. “Sorry, it looks like I’m needed. I’ll speak to you when you arrive.”
The line went dead.
CHAPTER 91
Inside Cathedral College, Langdon and Katherine bounded up the basement stairs and hurried down a
darkened hallway looking for a front exit. No longer did they hear the sounds of helicopter blades overhead,
and Langdon felt hopeful they could slip out unseen and find their way up to Kalorama Heights to see Peter.
They found him. He’s alive.
Thirty seconds earlier, when they’d hung up with the female security guard, Katherine had hurriedly hoisted
the steaming pyramid and capstone out of the water. The pyramid was still dripping when she lowered it into
Langdon’s leather bag. Now he could feel the heat radiating through the leather.
Excitement over Peter’s discovery had temporarily trumped any further reflection on the capstone’s glowing
message—Eight Franklin Square— but there would be time for that once they got to Peter.
As they rounded the corner at the top of the stairs, Katherine stopped short and pointed into a sitting room
across the hall. Through the bay window, Langdon could see a sleek black helicopter sitting silent on the
lawn. A lone pilot stood beside it, facing away from them and talking on his radio. There was also a black
Escalade with tinted windows parked nearby.
Staying in the shadows, Langdon and Katherine moved into the sitting room, and peered out the window to
see if they could see the rest of the field team. Thankfully, the huge lawn outside the National Cathedral was
empty.
“They must be inside the cathedral,” Langdon said.
“They’re not,” a deep voice said behind them.
Langdon and Katherine wheeled around to see who had spoken. In the doorway of the sitting room, two
black-clad figures aimed laser-sighted rifles at them. Langdon could see a glowing red dot dancing on his
chest.
“Nice to see you again, Professor,” said a familiar raspy voice. The agents parted, and the tiny form of
Director Sato sliced effortlessly through, crossing the sitting room and stopping directly in front of Langdon.
“You’ve made some exceedingly poor choices tonight.”
“The police found Peter Solomon,” Langdon declared forcefully. “He’s in bad shape, but he’ll live. It’s
over.”
If Sato was surprised Peter had been found, she did not show it. Her eyes were unflinching as she walked to
Langdon and stopped only inches away. “Professor, I can assure you, this is nowhere near over. And if the
police are now involved, it has only become more serious. As I told you earlier this evening, this is an
extremely delicate situation. You never should have run away with that pyramid.”
“Ma’am,” Katherine blurted, “I need to see my brother. You can have the pyramid, but you must let—”
“I must?” Sato demanded, spinning to Katherine. “Ms. Solomon, I assume?” She stared at Katherine with fire
in her eyes and then turned back to Langdon. “Put the leather bag on the table.”
Langdon glanced down at the pair of laser sights on his chest. He set the leather bag on the coffee table. An
agent approached cautiously, unzipped the bag, and pulled the two sides apart. A little puff of trapped steam
billowed up out of the bag. He aimed his light inside, stared for a long, puzzled moment, and then nodded to
Sato.
Sato walked over and peered into the bag. The wet pyramid and capstone glistened in the beam of the
flashlight. Sato crouched down, looking very closely at the golden capstone, which Langdon realized she had
only seen in X-ray.
“The inscription,” Sato demanded. “Does it mean anything to you? ‘The secret hides within The Order’?”
“We’re not sure, ma’am.”
“Why is the pyramid steaming hot?”
“We submerged it in boiling water,” Katherine said without hesitation. “It was part of the process of
deciphering the code. We’ll tell you everything, but please let us go see my brother. He’s been through—”
“You boiled the pyramid?” Sato demanded.
“Turn off the flashlight,” Katherine said. “Look at the capstone. You can probably still see.”
The agent flicked off his light, and Sato knelt down before the capstone. Even from where Langdon was
standing, he could see that the text on the capstone was still glowing slightly.
“Eight Franklin Square?” Sato said, sounding amazed.
“Yes, ma’am. That text was written with an incandescent lacquer or something. The thirty-third degree was
actually—”
“And the address?” Sato demanded. “Is this what this guy wants?”
“Yes,” Langdon said. “He believes the pyramid is a map that will tell him the location of a great treasure—
the key to unlocking the Ancient Mysteries.”
Sato looked again at the capstone, her expression one of disbelief. “Tell me,” she said, fear creeping into her
voice, “have you contacted this man yet? Have you already given him this address?”
“We tried.” Langdon explained what had happened when they called the man’s cell phone.
Sato listened, running her tongue over her yellow teeth as he spoke. Despite looking ready to erupt with
anger over the situation, she turned to one of her agents and spoke in a restrained whisper. “Send him in.
He’s in the SUV.”
The agent nodded and spoke into his transceiver.
“Send who in?” Langdon said.
“The only person who has any hope of fixing the goddamn mess you made!”
“What mess?” Langdon fired back. “Now that Peter is safe, everything is—”
“For Christ’s sake!” Sato exploded. “This is not about Peter! I tried to tell you that at the Capitol Building,
Professor, but you chose to work against me rather than with me! Now you’ve made an ungodly mess! When
you destroyed your cell phone, which, by the way, we were tracking, you cut off your communication with
this man. And this address you uncovered—whatever the hell it is—this address was our one chance to catch
this lunatic. I needed you to play his game, to provide him with this address so we would know where the
hell to catch him!”
Before Langdon could reply, Sato directed the remainder of her wrath at Katherine.
“And you, Ms. Solomon! You knew where this maniac lived? Why didn’t you tell me? You sent a rent-a-cop
to this man’s house? Don’t you see you’ve ruined any chance we had of catching him there? I’m glad your
brother is safe, but let me tell you this, we are facing a crisis tonight whose ramifications far outreach your
family. They will be felt all around the world. The man who took your brother has enormous power, and we
need to catch him immediately.”
As she finished her tirade, the tall, elegant silhouette of Warren Bellamy emerged from the shadows and
stepped into the sitting room. He looked rumpled, bruised, and shaken . . . like he’d been through hell.
“Warren!” Langdon stood up. “Are you okay?”
“No,” he replied. “Not really.”
“Did you hear? Peter is safe!”
Bellamy nodded, looking dazed, as if nothing mattered anymore. “Yes, I just heard your conversation. I’m
glad.”
“Warren, what the hell is going on?”
Sato intervened. “You boys can catch up in a minute. Right now, Mr. Bellamy is going to reach out to this
lunatic and communicate with him. Just like he’s been doing all night.”
Langdon felt lost. “Bellamy hasn’t been communicating with this guy tonight! This guy doesn’t even know
Bellamy is involved!”
Sato turned to Bellamy and raised her eyebrows.
Bellamy sighed. “Robert, I’m afraid I haven’t been entirely honest with you this evening.” Langdon could
only stare. “I thought I was doing the right thing . . .” Bellamy said, looking frightened.
“Well,” Sato said, “now you will do the right thing . . . and we’d all better pray to God it works.” As if to
substantiate Sato’s portentous tone, the mantel clock began chiming the hour. Sato took out a Ziploc bag of
items and tossed it to Bellamy. “Here’s your stuff. Does your cell phone take photos?”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“Good. Hold up the capstone.”
The message Mal’akh had just received was from his contact—Warren Bellamy—the Mason he had sent to
the Capitol Building earlier tonight to assist Robert Langdon. Bellamy, like Langdon, wanted Peter Solomon
back alive and had assured Mal’akh he would help Langdon acquire and decipher the pyramid. All night,
Mal’akh had been receiving e-mail updates, which had been automatically forwarded to his cell phone.
This should be interesting, Mal’akh thought, opening the message.
From: Warren Bellamy
got separated from langdon
but finally have info you
demanded. proof attached.
call for missing piece. —wb
—one attachment (jpeg)—
Call for missing piece? Mal’akh wondered, opening the attachment.
The attachment was a photo.
When Mal’akh saw it, he gasped out loud, and he could feel his heart start pounding with excitement. He was
looking at a close-up of a tiny golden pyramid. The legendary capstone! The ornate engraving on the face
carried a promising message: The secret hides within The Order.
Beneath the inscription, Mal’akh now saw something that stunned him. The capstone seemed to be glowing.
In disbelief, he stared at the faintly radiant text and realized that the legend was literally true: The Masonic
Pyramid transforms itself to reveal its secret to the worthy.
How this magical transformation had occurred, Mal’akh had no idea, and he didn’t care. The glowing text
was clearly pointing to a specific location in D.C., exactly as prophesied. Franklin Square. Unfortunately, the
photo of the capstone also included Warren Bellamy’s index finger, which was strategically positioned on the
capstone to block out a critical piece of information.
The
secret hides
within The Order
Franklin Square
Call for missing piece. Mal’akh now understood Bellamy’s meaning.
The Architect of the Capitol had been cooperative all night, but now he had chosen to play a very dangerous
game.
CHAPTER 92
Beneath the watchful gaze of several armed CIA agents, Langdon, Katherine, and Bellamy waited with Sato
in the Cathedral College sitting room. On the coffee table before them, Langdon’s leather bag was still open,
the golden capstone peeking out the top. The words Eight Franklin Square had now faded away, leaving no
evidence that they had ever existed.
Katherine had pleaded with Sato to let her go see her brother, but Sato had simply shaken her head, eyes
fixed on Bellamy’s cell phone. It sat on the coffee table and had yet to ring.
Why didn’t Bellamy just tell me the truth? Langdon wondered. Apparently, the Architect had been in contact
with Peter’s captor all night, reassuring him that Langdon was making progress deciphering the pyramid. It
was a bluff, an attempt to buy time for Peter. In fact, Bellamy was doing all he could to interfere with anyone
who threatened to unveil the pyramid’s secret. Now, however, it seemed that Bellamy had switched sides. He
and Sato were now prepared to risk the pyramid’s secret in hopes of catching this man.
“Take your hands off me!” shouted an elderly voice in the hall. “I’m blind, not inept! I know my way
through the college!” Dean Galloway was still protesting loudly as a CIA agent manhandled him into the
sitting room and forced him into one of the chairs.
“Who’s here?” Galloway demanded, his blank eyes staring dead ahead. “It sounds like a lot of you. How
many do you need to detain an old man? Really now!”
“There are seven of us,” Sato declared. “Including Robert Langdon, Katherine Solomon, and your Masonic
brother Warren Bellamy.”
Galloway slumped, all his bluster gone.
“We’re okay,” Langdon said. “And we just heard that Peter is safe. He’s in bad shape, but the police are with
him.”
“Thank heavens,” Galloway said. “And the—”
A loud rattling caused everyone in the room to jump. It was Bellamy’s cell phone vibrating against the coffee
table. Everyone fell silent.
“Okay, Mr. Bellamy,” Sato said. “Don’t blow it. You know the stakes.”
Bellamy took a deep breath and exhaled. Then he reached down and pressed the speakerphone button to
connect the call.
“Bellamy here,” he said, speaking loudly toward the phone on the coffee table.
The voice that crackled back through the speaker was familiar, an airy whisper. It sounded like he was
calling from a hands-free speakerphone inside a car. “It’s past midnight, Mr. Bellamy. I was about to put
Peter out of his misery.”
There was an uneasy silence in the room. “Let me talk to him.”
“Impossible,” the man replied. “We’re driving. He’s tied up in the trunk.”
Langdon and Katherine exchanged looks and then began shaking their heads at everyone. He’s bluffing! He
no longer has Peter!
Sato motioned for Bellamy to keep pressing.
“I want proof that Peter’s alive,” Bellamy said. “I’m not giving you the rest of—”
“Your Worshipful Master needs a doctor. Don’t waste time with negotiations. Tell me the street number on
Franklin Square, and I’ll bring Peter to you there.”
“I told you, I want—”
“Now!” the man exploded. “Or I will pull over and Peter Solomon dies this instant!”
“You listen to me,” Bellamy said forcefully. “If you want the rest of the address, you’ll play by my rules.
Meet me at Franklin Square. Once you deliver Peter alive, I’ll tell you the number of the building.”
“How do I know you won’t bring the authorities?”
“Because I can’t risk double-crossing you. Peter’s life is not the only card you hold. I know what’s really at
stake tonight.”
“You do realize,” the man on the phone said, “that if I sense so much as a hint of anyone other than you at
Franklin Square, I will keep driving, and you will never find even a trace of Peter Solomon. And of course . .
. that will be the least of your worries.”
“I’ll come alone,” Bellamy replied somberly. “When you turn over Peter, I’ll give you everything you need.”
“Center of the square,” the man said. “It will take me at least twenty minutes to get there. I suggest you wait
for me as long as it takes.”
The line went dead.
Instantly, the room sprang to life. Sato began shouting orders. Several field agents grabbed their radios and
headed for the door. “Move! Move!”
In the chaos, Langdon looked to Bellamy for some kind of explanation as to what was actually going on
tonight, but the older man was already being hurried out the door.
“I need to see my brother!” Katherine shouted. “You have to let us go!”
Sato walked over to Katherine. “I don’t have to do anything, Ms. Solomon. Is that clear?”
Katherine stood her ground and looked desperately into Sato’s small eyes.
“Ms. Solomon, my top priority is apprehending the man at Franklin Square, and you will sit here with one of
my men until I accomplish that task. Then, and only then, will we deal with your brother.”
“You’re missing the point,” Katherine said. “I know exactly where this man lives! It’s literally five minutes
up the road in Kalorama Heights, and there will be evidence there that will help you! Besides, you said you
want to keep this quiet. Who knows what Peter will start telling the authorities once he’s stabilized.”
Sato pursed her lips, apparently registering Katherine’s point. Outside, the chopper blades began winding up.
Sato frowned and then turned to one of her men. “Hartmann, you take the Escalade. Transport Ms. Solomon
and Mr. Langdon to Kalorama Heights. Peter Solomon is not to speak to anyone. Is that understood?”
“Yes, ma’am,” the agent said.
“Call me when you get there. Tell me what you find. And don’t let these two out of your sight.”
Agent Hartmann gave a quick nod, pulled out the Escalade keys, and headed for the door.
Katherine was right behind him.
Sato turned to Langdon. “I’ll see you shortly, Professor. I know you think I’m the enemy, but I can assure
you that’s not the case. Get to Peter at once. This isn’t over yet.”
Off to one side of Langdon, Dean Galloway was sitting quietly at the coffee table. His hands had found the
stone pyramid, which was still sitting in Langdon’s open leather bag on the table in front of him. The old
man was running his hands over the stone’s warm surface.
Langdon said, “Father, are you coming to see Peter?”
“I’d just slow you down.” Galloway removed his hands from the bag and zipped it up around the pyramid.
“I’ll stay right here and pray for Peter’s recovery. We can all speak later. But when you show Peter the
pyramid, would you please tell him something for me?”
“Of course.” Langdon hoisted the bag onto his shoulder.
“Tell him this.” Galloway cleared his throat. “The Masonic Pyramid has always kept her secret . . .
sincerely.”
“I don’t understand.”
The old man winked. “Just tell Peter that. He will understand.”
With that, Dean Galloway bowed his head and began praying.
Perplexed, Langdon left him there and hurried outside. Katherine was already in the front seat of the SUV
giving the agent directions. Langdon climbed in back and had barely closed the door before the giant vehicle
was rocketing across the lawn, racing northward to Kalorama Heights.
CHAPTER 93
Franklin Square is located in the northwest quadrant of downtown Washington, bordered by K and
Thirteenth streets. It is home to many historic buildings, most notably the Franklin School, from which
Alexander Graham Bell sent the world’s first wireless message in 1880.
High above the square, a fast-moving UH-60 helicopter approached from the west, having completed its
journey from the National Cathedral in a matter of minutes. Plenty of time, Sato thought, peering down at the
square below. She knew it was critical that her men got into position undetected before their target arrived.
He said he wouldn’t be here for at least twenty minutes.
On Sato’s command, the pilot performed a “touch-hover” on the roof of the tallest building around—the
renowned One Franklin Square—a towering and prestigious office building with two gold spires on top. The
maneuver was illegal, of course, but the chopper was there only a few seconds, and its skids barely touched
the gravel rooftop. Once everyone had jumped out, the pilot immediately lifted off, banking to the east,
where he would climb to “silent altitude” and provide invisible support from above.
Sato waited as her field team collected their things and prepared Bellamy for his task. The Architect was still
looking dazed from having seen the file on Sato’s secure laptop. As I said . . . an issue of national security.
Bellamy had quickly understood Sato’s meaning and was now fully cooperative.
“All set, ma’am,” Agent Simkins said.
On Sato’s command, the agents ushered Bellamy across the rooftop and disappeared down a stairwell,
heading for ground level to take up their positions.
Sato walked to the edge of the building and gazed down. The rectangular wooded park below filled the entire
block. Plenty of cover. Sato’s team fully understood the importance of making an undetected intercept. If
their target sensed a presence here and decided just to slip away . . . the director didn’t even want to think
about it.
The wind up here was gusty and cold. Sato wrapped her arms around herself, and planted her feet firmly to
avoid getting blown over the edge. From this high vantage point, Franklin Square looked smaller than she
recalled, with fewer buildings. She wondered which building was Eight Franklin Square. This was
information she had requested from her analyst Nola, from whom she expected word at any moment.
Bellamy and the agents now appeared, looking like ants fanning out into the darkness of the wooded area.
Simkins positioned Bellamy in a clearing near the center of the deserted park. Then Simkins and his team
melted into the natural cover, disappearing from view. Within seconds, Bellamy was alone, pacing and
shivering in the light of a streetlamp near the center of the park.
Sato felt no pity.
She lit a cigarette and took a long drag, savoring the warmth as it permeated her lungs. Satisfied that
everything below was in order, she stepped back from the edge to await her two phone calls—one from her
analyst Nola and one from Agent Hartmann, whom she had sent to Kalorama Heights.
CHAPTER 94
Slow down! Langdon gripped the backseat of the Escalade as it flew around a corner, threatening to tip up on
two tires. CIA agent Hartmann was either eager to show off his driving skills to Katherine, or he had orders
to get to Peter Solomon before Solomon recuperated enough to say anything he shouldn’t say to the local
authorities.
The high-speed game of beat-the-red-light on Embassy Row had been worrisome enough, but now they were
racing through the winding residential neighborhood of Kalorama Heights. Katherine shouted directions as
they went, having been to this man’s house earlier that afternoon.
With every turn, the leather bag at Langdon’s feet rocked back and forth, and Langdon could hear the clank
of the capstone, which had clearly been jarred from the top of the pyramid and was now bouncing around in
the bottom of his bag. Fearing it might get damaged, he fished around inside until he found it. It was still
warm, but the glowing text had now faded and disappeared, returning to its original engraving:
The secret hides within The Order.
As Langdon was about to place the capstone in a side pocket, he noticed its elegant surface was covered with
tiny white gobs of something. Puzzled, he tried to wipe them off, but they were stuck on and hard to the
touch . . . like plastic. What in the world? He could now see that the surface of the stone pyramid itself was
also covered with the little white dots. Langdon used his fingernail and picked one off, rolling it between his
fingers.
“Wax?” he blurted.
Katherine glanced over her shoulder. “What?”
“There are bits of wax all over the pyramid and capstone. I don’t understand it. Where could that possibly
have come from?”
“Something in your bag, maybe?”
“I don’t think so.”
As they rounded a corner, Katherine pointed through the windshield and turned to Agent Hartmann. “That’s
it! We’re here.”
Langdon glanced up and saw the spinning lights of a security vehicle parked in a driveway up ahead. The
driveway gate was pulled aside and the agent gunned the SUV inside the compound.
The house was a spectacular mansion. Every light inside was ablaze, and the front door was wide open. A
half-dozen vehicles were parked haphazardly in the driveway and on the lawn, apparently having arrived in a
hurry. Some of the cars were still running and had their headlights shining, most on the house, but one
askew, practically blinding them as they drove in.
Agent Hartmann skidded to a stop on the lawn beside a white sedan with a brightly colored decal:
PREFERRED SECURITY. The spinning lights and the high beams in their face made it hard to see.
Katherine immediately jumped out and raced for the house. Langdon heaved his bag onto his shoulder
without taking the time to zip it up. He followed Katherine at a jog across the lawn toward the open front
door. The sounds of voices echoed within. Behind Langdon, the SUV chirped as Agent Hartmann locked the
vehicle and hurried after them.
Katherine bounded up the porch stairs, through the main door, and disappeared into the entryway. Langdon
crossed the threshold behind her and could see Katherine was already moving across the foyer and down the
main hallway toward the sound of voices. Beyond her, visible at the end of the hall, was a dining-room table
where a woman in a security uniform was sitting with her back to them.
“Officer!” Katherine shouted as she ran. “Where is Peter Solomon?”
Langdon rushed after her, but as he did so, an unexpected movement caught his eye. To his left, through the
living-room window, he could see the driveway gate was now swinging shut. Odd. Something else caught his
eye . . . something that had been hidden from him by the glare of the spinning lights and the blinding high
beams when they drove in. The half-dozen cars parked haphazardly in the driveway looked nothing like the
police cars and emergency vehicles Langdon had imagined they were.
A Mercedes? . . . a Hummer? . . . a Tesla Roadster?
In that instant, Langdon also realized the voices he heard in the house were nothing but a television blaring in
the direction of the dining room.
Wheeling in slow motion, Langdon shouted down the hallway. “Katherine, wait!”
But as he turned, he could see that Katherine Solomon was no longer running.
She was airborne.
CHAPTER 95
Katherine Solomon knew she was falling . . . but she couldn’t figure out why.
She had been running down the hall toward the security guard in the dining room when suddenly her feet had
become entangled in an invisible obstacle, and her entire body had lurched forward, sailing through the air.
Now she was returning to earth . . . in this case, a hardwood floor.
Katherine crashed down on her stomach, the wind driven violently from her lungs. Above her, a heavy coat
tree teetered precariously and then toppled over, barely missing her on the floor. She raised her head, still
gasping for breath, puzzled to see that the female security guard in the chair had not moved a muscle.
Stranger still, the toppled coat tree appeared to have a thin wire attached to the bottom, which had been
stretched across the hallway.
Why in the world would someone . . . ?
“Katherine!” Langdon was shouting to her, and as Katherine rolled onto her side and looked back at him, she
felt her blood turn to ice. Robert! Behind you! She tried to scream, but she was still gasping for breath. All
she could do was watch in terrifying slow motion as Langdon rushed down the hall to help her, completely
unaware that behind him, Agent Hartmann was staggering across the threshold and clutching his throat.
Blood sprayed through Hartmann’s hands as he groped at the handle of a long screwdriver that protruded
from his neck.
As the agent pitched forward, his attacker came into full view.
My God . . . no!
Naked except for a strange undergarment that looked like a loincloth, the massive man had apparently been
hiding in the foyer. His muscular body was covered from head to toe with strange tattoos. The front door was
swinging closed, and he was rushing down the hall after Langdon.
Agent Hartmann hit the floor just as the front door slammed shut. Langdon looked startled and whirled
around, but the tattooed man was already on him, thrusting some kind of device into his back. There was a
flash of light and a sharp electrical sizzle, and Katherine saw Langdon go rigid. Eyes frozen wide, Langdon
lurched forward, collapsing down in a paralyzed heap. He fell hard on top of his leather bag, the pyramid
tumbling out onto the floor.
Without so much as a glance down at his victim, the tattooed man stepped over Langdon and headed directly
for Katherine. She was already crawling backward into the dining room, where she collided with a chair. The
female security guard, who had been propped in that chair, now wobbled and dropped to the floor in a heap
beside her. The woman’s lifeless expression was one of terror. Her mouth was stuffed with a rag.
The enormous man had reached her before Katherine had time to react. He seized her by the shoulders with
impossible strength. His face, no longer covered by makeup, was an utterly terrifying sight. His muscles
flexed, and she felt herself being flipped over onto her stomach like a rag doll. A heavy knee ground into her
back, and for a moment, she thought she would break in two. He grabbed her arms and pulled them
backward.
With her head now turned to one side and her cheek pressed into the carpet, Katherine could see Langdon,
his body still jerking, facing away from her. Beyond that, Agent Hartmann lay motionless in the foyer.
Cold metal pinched Katherine’s wrists, and she realized she was being bound with wire. In terror, she tried to
pull away, but doing so sent searing pain into her hands.
“This wire will cut you if you move,” the man said, finishing with her wrists and moving down to her ankles
with frightening efficiency.
Katherine kicked at him, and he threw a powerful fist into the back of her right thigh, crippling her leg.
Within seconds, her ankles were bound.
“Robert!” she now managed to call out.
Langdon was groaning on the floor in the hallway. He lay crumpled on his leather bag with the stone
pyramid lying on its side near his head. Katherine realized the pyramid was her last hope.
“We deciphered the pyramid!” she told her attacker. “I’ll tell you everything!”
“Yes, you will.” With that, he pulled the cloth from the dead woman’s mouth and firmly stuffed it into
Katherine’s.
It tasted like death.
Robert Langdon’s body was not his own. He lay, numb and immobile, his cheek pressed against the
hardwood floor. He had heard enough about stun guns to know they crippled their victims by temporarily
overloading the nervous system. Their action—something called electromuscular disruption—might as well
have been a bolt of lightning. The excruciating jolt of pain seemed to penetrate every molecule of his body.
Now, despite his mind’s focused intention, his muscles refused to obey the command he was sending them.
Get up!
Facedown, paralyzed on the floor, Langdon was gulping shallow breaths, scarcely able to inhale. He had yet
to lay eyes on the man who had attacked him, but he could see Agent Hartmann lying in an expanding pool
of blood. Langdon had heard Katherine struggling and arguing, but moments ago her voice had become
muffled, as if the man had stuffed something in her mouth.
Get up, Robert! You’ve got to help her!
Langdon’s legs were tingling now, a fiery and painful recovery of feeling, but still they refused to cooperate.
Move! His arms twitched as sensation started to come back, along with feeling in his face and neck. With
great effort, he managed to rotate his head, dragging his cheek roughly across the hardwood floor as he
turned his head to look down into the dining room.
Langdon’s sight line was impeded—by the stone pyramid, which had toppled out of his bag and was lying
sideways on the floor, its base inches from his face.
For an instant, Langdon didn’t understand what he was looking at. The square of stone before him was
obviously the base of the pyramid, and yet it looked somehow different. Very different. It was still square,
and still stone . . . but it was no longer flat and smooth. The base of the pyramid was covered with engraved
markings. How is this possible? He stared for several seconds, wondering if he was hallucinating. I looked at
the base of this pyramid a dozen times . . . and there were no markings!
Langdon now realized why.
His breathing reflex kick-started, and he drew a sudden gasp of air, realizing that the Masonic Pyramid had
secrets yet to share. I have witnessed another transformation.
In a flash, Langdon understood the meaning of Galloway’s last request. Tell Peter this: The Masonic
Pyramid has always kept her secret . . . sincerely. The words had seemed strange at the time, but now
Langdon understood that Dean Galloway was sending Peter a code. Ironically, this same code had been a
plot twist in a mediocre thriller Langdon had read years ago.
Sin-cere.
Since the days of Michelangelo, sculptors had been hiding the flaws in
their work by smearing hot wax into the cracks and then dabbing the wax with stone dust. The method was
considered cheating, and therefore, any sculpture “without wax”—literally sine cera—was considered a
“sincere” piece of art. The phrase stuck. To this day we still sign our letters “sincerely” as a promise that we
have written “without wax” and that our words are true.
The engravings on the base of this pyramid had been concealed by the same method. When Katherine
followed the capstone’s directions and boiled the pyramid, the wax melted away, revealing the writing on the
base. Galloway had run his hands over the pyramid in the sitting room, apparently feeling the markings
exposed on the bottom.
Now, if only for an instant, Langdon had forgotten all the danger he and Katherine faced. He stared at the
incredible array of symbols on the base of the pyramid. He had no idea what they meant . . . or what they
would ultimately reveal, but one thing was for certain. The Masonic Pyramid has secrets left to tell. Eight
Franklin Square is not the final answer.
Whether it was this adrenaline-filled revelation or simply the extra few seconds lying there, Langdon did not
know, but he suddenly felt control returning to his body.
Painfully, he swept an arm to one side, pushing the leather bag out of the way to clear his sight line into the
dining room.
To his horror, he saw that Katherine had been tied up, and a large rag had been stuffed deep into her mouth.
Langdon flexed his muscles, trying to climb to his knees, but a moment later, he froze in utter disbelief. The
dining-room doorway had just filled with a chilling sight—a human form unlike anything Langdon had ever
seen.
What in the name of God . . . ?!
Langdon rolled, kicking with his legs, trying to back away, but the huge tattooed man grabbed him, flipping
him onto his back and straddling his chest. He placed his knees on Langdon’s biceps, pinning Langdon pain
fully to the floor. The man’s chest bore a rippling double-headed phoenix. His neck, face, and shaved head
were covered with a dazzling array of unusually intricate symbols—sigils, Langdon knew—which were used
in the rituals of dark ceremonial magic.
Before Langdon could process anything more, the huge man clasped Langdon’s ears between his palms,
lifted his head up off the floor, and, with incredible force, smashed it back down onto the hardwood.
Everything went black.
CHAPTER 96
Mal’akh stood in his hallway and surveyed the carnage around him. His home looked like a battlefield.
Robert Langdon lay unconscious at his feet.
Katherine Solomon was bound and gagged on the dining-room floor.
The corpse of a female security guard lay crumpled nearby, having toppled off the chair where she was
propped. This female guard, eager to save her own life, had done exactly as Mal’akh commanded. With a
knife to her throat, she had answered Mal’akh’s cell phone and told the lie that had coaxed Langdon and
Katherine to come racing out here. She had no partner, and Peter Solomon was certainly not okay. As soon
as the woman had given her performance, Mal’akh had quietly strangled her.
To complete the illusion that Mal’akh was not home, he had phoned Bellamy using the hands-free speaker in
one of his cars. I’m on the road, he had told Bellamy and whoever else had been listening. Peter is in my
trunk. In fact, Mal’akh was driving only between his garage and his front yard, where he had left several of
his myriad cars parked askew with the headlights on and the engines running.
The deception had worked perfectly.
Almost.
The only wrinkle was the bloody black-clad heap in the foyer with a screwdriver protruding from his neck.
Mal’akh searched the corpse and had to chuckle when he found a high-tech transceiver and cell phone with a
CIA logo. It seems even they are aware of my power. He removed the batteries and crushed both devices
with a heavy bronze doorstop.
Mal’akh knew he had to move quickly now, especially if the CIA was involved. He strode back over to
Langdon. The professor was out cold and would be for a while. Mal’akh’s eyes moved with trepidation now
to the stone pyramid on the floor beside the professor’s open bag. His breath caught, and his heart pounded.
I have waited for years . . .
His hands trembled slightly as he reached down and picked up the Masonic Pyramid. As he ran his fingers
slowly across the engravings, he felt awed by their promise. Before he became too entranced, he put the
pyramid back in Langdon’s bag with the capstone and zipped it up.
I will assemble the pyramid soon . . . in a much safer location.
He threw Langdon’s bag over his shoulder and then tried to hoist Langdon himself, but the professor’s toned
physique weighed much more than anticipated. Mal’akh settled on grabbing him beneath the armpits and
dragging him across the floor. He’s not going to like where he ends up, Mal’akh thought.
As he dragged Langdon off, the television in the kitchen blared. The sound of voices from the TV had been
part of the deception, and Mal’akh had yet to turn it off. The station was now broadcasting a televangelist
leading his congregation in the Lord’s Prayer. Mal’akh wondered if any of his hypnotized viewers had any
idea where this prayer really came from.
“ . . . On earth as it is in heaven . . .” the group intoned.
Yes, Mal’akh thought. As above, so below.
“ . . . And lead us not into temptation . . .”
Help us master the weakness of our flesh.
“ . . . Deliver us from evil . . .” they all beseeched.
Mal’akh smiled. That could be difficult. The darkness is growing. Even so, he had to give them credit for
trying. Humans who spoke to invisible forces and requested help were a dying breed in this modern world.
Mal’akh was dragging Langdon across the living room when the congregation declared, “Amen!”
Amon, Mal’akh corrected. Egypt is the cradle of your religion. The god Amon was the prototype for Zeus . . .
for Jupiter . . . and for every modern face of God. To this day, every religion on earth shouted out a variation
of his name. Amen! Amin! Aum!
The televangelist began quoting verses from the Bible describing hierarchies of angels, demons, and spirits
that ruled in heaven and hell. “Protect your souls from evil forces!” he warned them. “Lift your hearts in
prayer! God and his angels will hear you!”
He’s right, Mal’akh knew. But so will the demons.
Mal’akh had learned long ago that through proper application of the Art, a practitioner could open a portal to
the spiritual realm. The invisible forces that existed there, much like man himself, came in many forms, both
good and evil. Those of Light healed, protected, and sought to bring order to the universe. Those of Dark
functioned oppositely . . . bringing destruction and chaos.
If properly summoned, the invisible forces could be persuaded to do a practitioner’s bidding on earth . . . thus
instilling him with seemingly supernatural power. In exchange for helping the summoner, these forces
required offerings—prayers and praise for those of Light . . . and the spilling of blood for those of Dark.
The greater the sacrifice, the greater the power that is transferred. Mal’akh had begun his practice with the
blood of inconsequential animals. Over time, however, his choices for sacrifice had become more bold.
Tonight, I take the final step.
“Beware!” the preacher shouted, warning of the coming Apocalypse. “The final battle for the souls of man
will soon be fought!”
Indeed, Mal’akh thought. And I shall become its greatest warrior.
This battle, of course, had begun long, long ago. In ancient Egypt, those who perfected the Art had become
the great Adepts of history, evolving beyond the masses to become true practitioners of Light. They moved
as gods on earth. They built great temples of initiation to which neophytes traveled from around the world to
partake of the wisdom. There arose a race of golden men. For a brief span of time, mankind seemed poised to
elevate himself and transcend his earthly bonds.
The golden age of the Ancient Mysteries.
And yet man, being of the flesh, was susceptible to the sins of hubris, hatred, impatience, and greed. Over
time, there were those who corrupted the Art, perverting it and abusing its power for personal gain. They
began using this perverted version to summon dark forces. A different Art evolved . . . a more potent,
immediate, and intoxicating influence.
Such is my Art.
Such is my Great Work.
The illuminated Adepts and their esoteric fraternities witnessed the rising evil and saw that man was not
using his newfound knowledge for the good of his species. And so they hid their wisdom to keep it from the
eyes of the unworthy. Eventually, it was lost to history.
With this came the Great Fall of Man.
And a lasting darkness.
To this day, the noble descendants of the Adepts soldiered on, grasping blindly for the Light, trying to
recapture the lost power of their past, trying to keep the darkness at bay. They were the priests and
priestesses of the churches, temples, and shrines of all the religions on earth. Time had erased the memories .
. . detached them from their past. They no longer knew the Source from which their potent wisdom had once
flowed. When they were asked about the divine mysteries of their forebears, the new custodians of faith
vociferously disowned them, condemning them as heresy.
Have they truly forgotten? Mal’akh wondered.
Echoes of the ancient Art still resonated in every corner of the globe, from the mystical Kabbalists of
Judaism to the esoteric Sufis of Islam. Vestiges remained in the arcane rituals of Christianity, in its godeating
rites of Holy Communion, its hierarchies of saints, angels, and demons, its chanting and incantation,
its holy calendar’s astrological underpinnings, its consecrated robes, and in its promise of everlasting life.
Even now, its priests dispelled evil spirits by swinging smoke-filled censers, ringing sacred bells, and
sprinkling holy water. Christians still practiced the supernatural craft of exorcism—an early practice of their
faith that required the ability not only to cast out demons but to summon them.
And yet they cannot see their past?
Nowhere was the church’s mystical past more evident than at her epicenter. In Vatican City, at the heart of
St. Peter’s Square, stood the great Egyptian obelisk. Carved thirteen hundred years before Jesus took his first
breath—this numinous monolith had no relevance there, no link to modern Christianity. And yet there it was.
At the core of Christ’s church. A stone beacon, screaming to be heard. A reminder to those few sages who
remembered where it all began. This church, born of the womb of the Ancient Mysteries, still bore her rites
and symbols.
One symbol above all.
Adorning her altars, vestments, spires, and Scripture was the singular image of Christianity—that of a
precious, sacrificed human being. Christianity, more than any other faith, understood the transformative
power of sacrifice. Even now, to honor the sacrifice made by Jesus, his followers proffered their own feeble
gestures of personal sacrifice . . . fasting, Lenten renunciation, tithing.
All of those offerings are impotent, of course. Without blood . . . there is no true sacrifice.
The powers of darkness had long embraced blood sacrifice, and in doing so, they had grown so strong that
the powers of goodness now struggled to keep them in check. Soon the Light would be entirely consumed,
and the practitioners of darkness would move freely through the minds of men.
CHAPTER 97
“Eight Franklin Square must exist,” Sato insisted. “Look it up again!”
Nola Kaye sat at her desk and adjusted her headset. “Ma’am, I’ve checked everywhere . . . that address
doesn’t exist in D.C.”
“But I’m on the roof of One Franklin Square,” Sato said. “There has to be an Eight!”
Director Sato’s on a roof? “Hold on.” Nola began running a new search. She was considering telling the OS
director about the hacker, but Sato seemed fixated on Eight Franklin Square at the moment. Besides, Nola
still didn’t have all the information. Where’s that damned sys-sec, anyway?
“Okay,” Nola said, eyeing her screen, “I see the problem. One Franklin Square is the name of the building . .
. not the address. The address is actually 1301 K Street.”
The news seemed to confound the director. “Nola, I don’t have time to explain—the pyramid clearly points
to the address Eight Franklin Square.”
Nola sat bolt upright. The pyramid points to a specific location?
“The inscription,” Sato continued, “reads: ‘The secret hides within The Order—Eight Franklin Square.’”
Nola could scarcely imagine. “An order like . . . a Masonic or fraternal order?”
“I assume so,” Sato replied.
Nola thought a moment, and then began typing again. “Ma’am, maybe the street numbers on the square
changed over the years? I mean, if this pyramid is as old as legend claims, maybe the numbers on Franklin
Square were different when the pyramid was built? I’m now running a search without the number eight . . .
for . . . ‘the order’ . . . ‘Franklin Square’ . . . and ‘Washington, D.C.’ . . . and this way, we might get some
idea if there’s—” She stalled midsentence as the search results appeared.
“What have you got?” Sato demanded.
Nola stared at the first result on the list—a spectacular image of the Great Pyramid of Egypt—which served
as the thematic backdrop for the
home page dedicated to a building on Franklin Square. The building was unlike any other building on the
square.
Or in the entire city, for that matter.
What stopped Nola cold was not the building’s bizarre architecture, but rather the description of its purpose.
According to the Web site, this unusual edifice was built as a sacred mystical shrine, designed by . . . and
designed for . . . an ancient secret order.
CHAPTER 98
Robert Langdon regained consciousness with a crippling headache.
Where am I?
Wherever he was, it was dark. Deep-cave dark, and deathly silent.
He was lying on his back with his arms at his side. Confused, he tried moving his fingers and toes, relieved to
find they moved freely with no pain. What happened? With the exception of his headache and the profound
darkness, everything seemed more or less normal.
Almost everything.
Langdon realized he was lying on a hard floor that felt unusually smooth, like a sheet of glass. Stranger still,
he could feel that the slick surface was in direct contact with his bare flesh . . . shoulders, back, buttocks,
thighs, calves. Am I naked? Puzzled, he ran his hands over his body.
Jesus! Where the hell are my clothes?
In the darkness, the cobwebs began to lift, and Langdon saw flashes of memory . . . frightening snapshots . . .
a dead CIA agent . . . the face of a tattooed beast . . . Langdon’s head smashing into the floor. The images
came faster . . . and now he recalled the sickening image of Katherine Solomon bound and gagged on the
dining-room floor.
My God!
Langdon sat bolt upright, and as he did, his forehead smashed into something suspended only inches above
him. Pain exploded through his skull and he fell back, teetering near unconsciousness. Groggy, he reached up
with his hands, groping in the darkness to find the obstacle. What he found made no sense to him. It seemed
this room’s ceiling was less than a foot above him. What in the world? As he spread his arms to his sides in
an attempt to roll over, both of his hands hit sidewalls.
The truth now dawned on him. Robert Langdon was not in a room at all.
I’m in a box!
In the darkness of his small, coffinlike container, Langdon began pounding wildly with his fist. He shouted
over and over for help. The terror that gripped him deepened with each passing instant until it was
intolerable.
I have been buried alive.
The lid of Langdon’s strange coffin refused to budge, even with the full force of his arms and legs pushing
upward in wild panic. The box, from all he could tell, was made of heavy fiberglass. Airtight. Soundproof.
Lightproof. Escape-proof.
I am going to suffocate alone in this box.
He thought of the deep well into which he had fallen as a young boy, and of the terrifying night he spent
treading water alone in the darkness of a bottomless pit. That trauma had scarred Langdon’s psyche,
burdening him with an overwhelming phobia of enclosed spaces.
Tonight, buried alive, Robert Langdon was living his ultimate nightmare.
Katherine Solomon trembled in silence on the floor of Mal’akh’s dining room. The sharp wire around her
wrists and ankles had already cut into her, and the slightest movements seemed only to tighten her bonds.
The tattooed man had brutally knocked Langdon unconscious and dragged his limp body across the floor
along with his leather bag and the stone pyramid. Where they had gone, Katherine had no idea. The agent
who had accompanied them was dead. She had not heard a sound in many minutes, and she wondered if the
tattooed man and Langdon were still inside the house. She had been trying to scream for help, but with each
attempt, the rag in her mouth crept back dangerously closer to her windpipe.
Now she felt approaching footsteps on the floor, and she turned her head, hoping against hope that someone
was coming to help. The massive silhouette of her captor materialized in the hallway. Katherine recoiled as
she flashed on the image of him standing in her family home ten years earlier.
He killed my family.
Now he strode toward her. Langdon was nowhere to be seen. The man crouched down and gripped her
around the waist, hoisting her roughly onto his shoulder. The wire sliced into her wrists, and the rag muffled
her muted cries of pain. He carried her down the hallway toward the living room, where, earlier today, the
two of them had calmly sipped tea together.
Where is he taking me?!
He carried Katherine across the living room and stopped directly in front of the large oil painting of the
Three Graces that she had admired this afternoon.
“You mentioned you liked this painting,” the man whispered, his lips practically touching her ear. “I’m glad.
It may be the last thing of beauty you see.”
With that, he reached out and pressed his palm into the right side of the enormous frame. To Katherine’s
shock, the painting rotated into the wall, turning on a central pivot like a revolving door. A hidden doorway.
Katherine tried to wriggle free, but the man held her firmly, carrying her through the opening behind the
canvas. As the Three Graces pivoted shut behind them, she could see heavy insulation on the back of the
canvas. Whatever sounds were made back here were apparently not meant to be heard by the outside world.
The space behind the painting was cramped, more like a hallway than a room. The man carried her to the far
side and opened a heavy door, carrying her through it onto a small landing. Katherine found herself looking
down a narrow ramp into a deep basement. She drew a breath to scream, but the rag was choking her.
The incline was steep and narrow. The walls on either side were made of cement, awash in a bluish light that
seemed to emanate from below. The air that wafted up was warm and pungent, laden with an eerie blend of
smells . . . the sharp bite of chemicals, the smooth calm of incense, the earthy musk of human sweat, and,
pervading it all, a distinct aura of visceral, animal fear.
“Your science impressed me,” the man whispered as they reached the bottom of the ramp. “I hope mine
impresses you.”
CHAPTER 99
CIA field agent Turner Simkins crouched in the darkness of Franklin Park and kept his steady gaze on
Warren Bellamy. Nobody had taken the bait yet, but it was still early.
Simkins’s transceiver beeped, and he activated it, hoping one of his men had spotted something. But it was
Sato. She had new information.
Simkins listened and agreed with her concern. “Hold on,” he said. “I’ll see if I can get a visual.” He crawled
through the bushes in which he was hiding and peered back in the direction from which he had entered the
square. After some maneuvering, he finally opened a sight line.
Holy shit.
He was staring at a building that looked like an Old World mosque. Nestled between two much larger
buildings, the Moorish facade was made of gleaming terra-cotta tile laid in intricate multicolored designs.
Above the three massive doors, two tiers of lancet windows looked as if Arabian archers might appear and
open fire if anyone approached uninvited.
“I see it,” Simkins said.
“Any activity?”
“Nothing.”
“Good. I need you to reposition and watch it very carefully. It’s called the Almas Shrine Temple, and it’s the
headquarters of a mystical order.”
Simkins had worked in the D.C. area for a long time but was not familiar with this temple or any ancient
mystical order headquartered on Franklin Square.
“This building,” Sato said, “belongs to a group called the Ancient Arabic Order of Nobles of the Mystic
Shrine.”
“Never heard of them.”
“I think you have,” Sato said. “They’re an appendant body of the Masons, more commonly known as the
Shriners.”
Simkins shot a dubious glance at the ornate building. The Shriners? The guys who build hospitals for kids?
He could imagine no “order” less ominous sounding than a fraternity of philanthropists who wore little red
fezzes and marched in parades.
Even so, Sato’s concerns were valid. “Ma’am, if our target realizes that this building is in fact ‘The Order’ on
Franklin Square, he won’t need the address. He’ll simply bypass the rendezvous and go directly to the correct
location.”
“My thoughts exactly. Keep an eye on the entrance.”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“Any word from Agent Hartmann in Kalorama Heights?”
“No, ma’am. You asked him to phone you directly.”
“Well, he hasn’t.”
Odd, Simkins thought, checking his watch. He’s overdue.
CHAPTER 100
Robert Langdon lay shivering, naked and alone in total blackness. Paralyzed by fear, he was no longer
pounding or shouting. Instead, he had closed his eyes and was doing his best to control his hammering heart
and his panicked breathing.
You are lying beneath a vast, nighttime sky, he tried to convince himself. There is nothing above you but
miles of wide-open space.
This calming visualization had been the only way he had managed to survive a recent stint in an enclosed
MRI machine . . . that and a triple dose of Valium. Tonight, however, the visualization was having no effect
whatsoever.
The rag in Katherine Solomon’s mouth had shifted backward and was all but choking her. Her captor had
carried her down a narrow ramp and into a dark basement corridor. At the far end of the hall, she had
glimpsed a room lit with an eerie reddish-purple light, but they’d never made it that far. The man had stopped
instead at a small side room, carried her inside, and placed her on a wooden chair. He had set her down with
her bound wrists behind the chair back so she could not move.
Now Katherine could feel the wire on her wrists slicing deeper into her flesh. The pain barely registered next
to the rising panic she was feeling over being unable to breathe. The cloth in her mouth was slipping deeper
into her throat, and she felt herself gagging reflexively. Her vision started to tunnel.
Behind her, the tattooed man closed the room’s lone door and flipped on the light. Katherine’s eyes were
watering profusely now, and she could no longer differentiate objects in her immediate surroundings.
Everything had become a blur.
A distorted vision of colorful flesh appeared before her, and Katherine felt her eyes starting to flutter as she
teetered on the brink of unconsciousness. A scale-covered arm reached out and yanked the rag from her
mouth.
Katherine gasped, inhaling deep breaths, coughing and choking as her lungs flooded with precious air.
Slowly, her vision began to clear, and she found herself looking into the demon’s face. The visage was barely
human. Blanketing his neck, face, and shaved head was an astounding pattern of bizarre tattooed symbols.
With the exception of a small circle on top of his head, every inch of his body appeared to be decorated. A
massive double-headed phoenix on his chest glared at her through nipple eyes like some kind of ravenous
vulture, patiently waiting for her death.
“Open your mouth,” the man whispered.
Katherine stared at the monster with total revulsion. What?
“Open your mouth,” the man repeated. “Or the cloth goes back in.”
Trembling, Katherine opened her mouth. The man extended his thick, tattooed index finger, inserting it
between her lips. When he touched her tongue, Katherine thought she would vomit. He extracted his wet
finger and raised it to the top of his shaved head. Closing his eyes, he massaged her saliva into his small
circular patch of untattooed flesh.
Repulsed, Katherine looked away.
The room in which she was sitting appeared to be a boiler room of some sort—pipes on the walls, gurgling
sounds, fluorescent lights. Before she could take in her surroundings, though, her gaze stopped dead on
something beside her on the floor. A pile of clothing—turtleneck, tweed sport coat, loafers, Mickey Mouse
watch.
“My God!” She wheeled back to the tattooed animal before her. “What have you done with Robert?!”
“Shh,” the man whispered. “Or he’ll hear you.” He stepped to one side and motioned behind him.
Langdon was not there. All Katherine saw was a huge black fiberglass box. Its shape bore an unsettling
resemblance to the heavy crates in which corpses were shipped back from war. Two massive clasps firmly
locked the box shut.
“He’s inside?!” Katherine blurted. “But . . . he’ll suffocate!”
“No, he won’t,” the man said, pointing to a series of transparent pipes that ran along the wall into the bottom
of the crate. “He’ll only wish he could.”
In total darkness, Langdon listened intently to the muffled vibrations he now heard from the outside world.
Voices? He began pounding on the box and shouting at the top of his lungs. “Help! Can anyone hear me?!”
Far off, a muted voice called out. “Robert! My God, no! NO!”
He knew the voice. It was Katherine, and she sounded terrified. Even so, it was a welcome sound. Langdon
drew a breath to call out to her, but he stopped short, feeling an unexpected sensation at the back of his neck.
A faint breeze seemed to be emanating from the bottom of the box. How is that possible? He lay very still,
taking stock. Yes, definitely. He could feel the tiny hairs on the back of his neck being tickled by air
movement.
Instinctively, Langdon began feeling along the floor of the box, searching for the source of the air. It took
only a moment to locate. There’s a tiny vent! The small perforated opening felt similar to a drain plate on a
sink or tub, except that a soft, steady breeze was now coming up through it.
He’s pumping air in for me. He doesn’t want me to suffocate.
Langdon’s relief was short-lived. A terrifying sound was now emanating up through the holes in the vent. It
was the unmistakable gurgle of flowing liquid . . . coming his way.
Katherine stared in disbelief at the clear shaft of liquid that was progressing down one of the pipes toward
Langdon’s crate. The scene looked like some kind of twisted stage magician’s act.
He’s pumping water into the crate?!
Katherine strained at her bonds, ignoring the deep bite of the wires around her wrists. All she could do was
look on in panic. She could hear Langdon pounding in desperation, but as the water reached the underside of
the container, the pounding stopped. There was a moment of terrified silence. Then the pounding started
again with renewed desperation.
“Let him out!” Katherine begged. “Please! You can’t do this!”
“Drowning is a terrible death, you know.” The man spoke calmly as he paced around her in circles. “Your
assistant, Trish, could tell you that.”
Katherine heard his words, but she could barely process them.
“You may remember that I almost drowned once,” the man whispered. “It was on your family’s estate in
Potomac. Your brother shot me, and I fell through the ice, out at Zach’s bridge.”
Katherine glared at him, filled with loathing. The night you killed my mother.
“The gods protected me that night,” he said. “And they showed me the way . . . to become one of them.”
The water gurgling into the box behind Langdon’s head felt warm . . . body temperature. The fluid was
already several inches deep and had
completely swallowed the back of his naked body. As it began creeping up his rib cage, Langdon felt a stark
reality closing in fast.
I’m going to die.
With renewed panic, he raised his arms and began pounding wildly again.
CHAPTER 101
“You’ve got to let him out!” Katherine begged, crying now. “We’ll do whatever you want!” She could hear
Langdon pounding more frantically as the water flowed into his container.
The tattooed man just smiled. “You’re easier than your brother. The things I had to do to get Peter to tell me
his secrets . . .”
“Where is he?!” she demanded. “Where is Peter?! Tell me! We did exactly what you wanted! We solved the
pyramid and—”
“No, you did not solve the pyramid. You played a game. You withheld information and brought a
government agent to my home. Hardly behavior I intend to reward.”
“We didn’t have a choice,” she replied, choking back the tears. “The CIA is looking for you. They made us
travel with an agent. I’ll tell you everything. Just let Robert out!” Katherine could hear Langdon shouting and
pounding in the crate, and she could see the water flowing through the pipe. She knew he didn’t have a lot of
time.
In front of her, the tattooed man spoke calmly, stroking his chin. “I assume there are agents waiting for me at
Franklin Square?”
Katherine said nothing, and the man placed his massive palms on her shoulders, slowly pulling her forward.
With her arms still wire-bound be hind the chair back, her shoulders strained, burning with pain, threatening
to dislocate.
“Yes!” Katherine said. “There are agents at Franklin Square!”
He pulled harder. “What is the address on the capstone?”
The pain in her wrists and shoulders grew unbearable, but Katherine said nothing.
“You can tell me now, Katherine, or I’ll break your arms and ask you again.”
“Eight!” she gasped in pain. “The missing number is eight! The capstone says: ‘The secret hides within The
Order—Eight Franklin Square!’ I swear it. I don’t know what else to tell you! It’s Eight Franklin Square!”
The man still did not release her shoulders.
“That’s all I know!” Katherine said. “That’s the address! Let go of me! Let Robert out of that tank!”
“I would . . .” the man said, “but there’s one problem. I can’t go to Eight Franklin Square without being
caught. Tell me, what’s at that address?”
“I don’t know!”
“And the symbols on the base of the pyramid? On the underside? Do you know their meaning?”
“What symbols on the base?” Katherine had no idea what he was talking about. “The bottom has no symbols.
It’s smooth, blank stone!”
Apparently immune to the muffled cries for help emanating from the coffinlike crate, the tattooed man
calmly padded over to Langdon’s day-bag and retrieved the stone pyramid. Then he returned to Katherine
and held it up before her eyes so she could see the base.
When Katherine saw the engraved symbols, she gasped in bewilderment.
But . . . that’s impossible!
The bottom of the pyramid was entirely covered with intricate carvings. There was nothing there before! I’m
sure of it! She had no idea what these symbols could possibly mean. They seemed to span every mystical
tradition, including many she could not even place.
Total chaos.
“I . . . have no idea what this means,” she said.
“Nor do I,” her captor said. “Fortunately, we have a specialist at our disposal.” He glanced at the crate. “Let’s
ask him, shall we?” He carried the pyramid toward the crate.
For a brief instant of hope, Katherine thought he was going to unclasp the lid. Instead, he sat calmly on top of
the box, reached down, and slid a small panel to one side, revealing a Plexiglas window in the top of the
tank.
Light!
Langdon covered his eyes, squinting into the ray of light that now streamed in from above. As his eyes
adjusted, hope turned to confusion. He was looking up through what appeared to be a window in the top of
his crate. Through the window, he saw a white ceiling and a fluorescent light.
Without warning, the tattooed face appeared above him, peering down.
“Where is Katherine?!” Langdon shouted. “Let me out!”
The man smiled. “Your friend Katherine is here with me,” the man said. “I have the power to spare her life.
Your life as well. But your time is short, so I suggest you listen carefully.”
Langdon could barely hear him through the glass, and the water had risen higher, creeping across his chest.
“Are you aware,” the man asked, “that there are symbols on the base of the pyramid?”
“Yes!” Langdon shouted, having seen the extensive array of symbols when the pyramid had lain on the floor
upstairs. “But I have no idea what they mean! You need to go to Eight Franklin Square! The answer is there!
That’s what the capstone—”
“Professor, you and I both know the CIA is waiting for me there. I have no intention of walking into a trap.
Besides, I didn’t need the street number. There is only one building on that square that could possibly be
relevant—the Almas Shrine Temple.” He paused, staring down at Langdon. “The Ancient Arabic Order of
Nobles of the Mystic Shrine.”
Langdon was confused. He was familiar with the Almas Temple, but he had forgotten it was on Franklin
Square. The Shriners are . . . “The Order”? Their temple sits atop a secret staircase? It made no historical
sense whatsoever, but Langdon was in no position at the moment to debate history. “Yes!” he shouted. “That
must be it! The secret hides within The Order!”
“You’re familiar with the building?”
“Absolutely!” Langdon raised his throbbing head to keep his ears above the quickly rising liquid. “I can help
you! Let me out!”
“So you believe you can tell me what this temple has to do with the symbols on the base of the pyramid?”
“Yes! Let me just look at the symbols!”
“Very well, then. Let’s see what you come up with.”
Hurry! With the warm liquid rising around him, Langdon pushed up on the lid, willing the man to unclasp it.
Please! Hurry! But the lid never opened. Instead, the base of the pyramid suddenly appeared, hovering above
the Plexiglas window.
Langdon stared up in panic.
“I trust this view is close enough for you?”The man held the pyramid in his tattooed hands. “Think fast,
Professor. I’m guessing you have less than sixty seconds.”
CHAPTER 102
Robert Langdon had often heard it said that an animal, when cornered, was capable of miraculous feats of
strength. Nonetheless, when he threw his full force into the underside of his crate, nothing budged at all.
Around him, the liquid continued rising steadily. With no more than six inches of breathing room left,
Langdon had lifted his head into the pocket of air that remained. He was now face-to-face with the Plexiglas
window, his eyes only inches away from the underside of the stone pyramid whose baffling engraving
hovered above him.
I have no idea what this means.
Concealed for over a century beneath a hardened mixture of wax and stone dust, the Masonic Pyramid’s final
inscription was now laid bare. The engraving was a perfectly square grid of symbols from every tradition
imaginable—alchemical, astrological, heraldic, angelic, magical, numeric, sigilic, Greek, Latin. As a totality,
this was symbolic anarchy—a bowl of alphabet soup whose letters came from dozens of different languages,
cultures, and time periods.
Total chaos.
Symbologist Robert Langdon, in his wildest academic interpretations, could not fathom how this grid of
symbols could be deciphered to mean anything at all. Order from this chaos? Impossible.
The liquid was now creeping over his Adam’s apple, and Langdon could feel his level of terror rising along
with it. He continued banging on the tank. The pyramid stared back at him tauntingly.
In frantic desperation, Langdon focused every bit of his mental energy on the chessboard of symbols. What
could they possibly mean? Unfortunately, the assortment seemed so disparate that he could not even imagine
where to begin. They’re not even from the same eras in history!
Outside the tank, her voice muffled but audible, Katherine could be heard tearfully begging for Langdon’s
release. Despite his failure to see a solution, the prospect of death seemed to motivate every cell in his body
to find one. He felt a strange clarity of mind, unlike anything he had ever experienced. Think! He scanned the
grid intensely, searching for some clue—a pattern, a hidden word, a special icon, anything at all—but he saw
only a grid of unrelated symbols. Chaos.
With each passing second, Langdon had begun to feel an eerie numbness overtaking his body. It was as if his
very flesh were preparing to shield his mind from the pain of death. The water was now threatening to pour
into his ears, and he lifted his head as far as he could, pushing it against the top of the crate. Frightening
images began flashing before his eyes. A boy in New England treading water at the bottom of a dark well. A
man in Rome trapped beneath a skeleton in an overturned coffin.
Katherine’s shouts were growing more frantic. From all Langdon could hear, she was trying to reason with a
madman—insisting that Langdon could not be expected to decipher the pyramid without going to visit the
Almas Temple. “That building obviously holds the missing piece to this puzzle! How can Robert decipher
the pyramid without all the information?!”
Langdon appreciated her efforts, and yet he felt certain that “Eight Franklin Square” was not pointing to the
Almas Temple. The time line is all wrong! According to legend, the Masonic Pyramid was created in the
mid-1800s, decades before the Shriners even existed. In fact, Langdon realized, it was probably before the
square was even called Franklin Square. The capstone could not possibly have been pointing to an unbuilt
building at a nonexistent address. Whatever “Eight Franklin Square” was pointing to . . . it had to exist in
1850.
Unfortunately, Langdon was drawing a total blank.
He probed his memory banks for anything that could possibly fit the
time line. Eight Franklin Square? Something that was in existence in 1850? Langdon came up with nothing.
The liquid was trickling into his ears now. Fighting his terror, he stared up at the grid of symbols on the
glass. I don’t understand the connection! In a petrified frenzy, his mind began spewing all the far-flung
parallels it could generate.
Eight Franklin Square . . . squares . . . this grid of symbols is a square . . . the square and the compass are
Masonic symbols . . . Masonic altars are square . . . squares have ninety-degree angles. The water kept
rising, but Langdon blocked it out. Eight Franklin . . . eight . . . this grid is eight-by-eight . . . Franklin has
eight letters . . . “The Order” has eight letters . . . 8 is the rotated symbol for infinity . . . eight is the number
of destruction in numerology . . .
Langdon had no idea.
Outside the tank, Katherine was still pleading, but Langdon’s hearing was now intermittent as the water was
sloshing around his head.
“ . . . impossible without knowing . . . capstone’s message clearly . . . the secret hides within—”
Then she was gone.
Water poured into Langdon’s ears, blotting out the last of Katherine’s voice. A sudden womblike silence
engulfed him, and Langdon realized he truly was going to die.
The secret hides within—
Katherine’s final words echoed through the hush of his tomb.
The secret hides within . . .
Strangely, Langdon realized he had heard these exact words many times before.
The secret hides . . . within.
Even now, it seemed, the Ancient Mysteries were taunting him. “The secret hides within” was the core tenet
of the mysteries, urging man kind to seek God not in the heavens above . . . but rather within himself. The
secret hides within. It was the message of all the great mystical teachers.
The kingdom of God is within you, said Jesus Christ.
Know thyself, said Pythagoras.
Know ye not that ye are gods, said Hermes Trismegistus.
The list went on and on . . .
All the mystical teachings of the ages had attempted to convey this one idea. The secret hides within. Even
so, mankind continued looking to the heavens for the face of God.
This realization, for Langdon, now became an ultimate irony. Right
now, with his eyes facing the heavens like all the blind men who preceded him, Robert Langdon suddenly
saw the light.
It hit him like a bolt from above.
The
secret hides
within The Order
Eight Franklin Square
In a flash he understood.
The message on the capstone was suddenly crystal clear. Its meaning had been staring him in the face all
night. The text on the capstone, like the Masonic Pyramid itself, was a symbolon—a code in pieces—a
message written in parts. The capstone’s meaning was camouflaged in so simple a manner that Langdon
could scarcely believe he and Katherine had not spotted it.
More astonishing still, Langdon now realized that the message on the capstone did indeed reveal exactly how
to decipher the grid of symbols on the base of the pyramid. It was so very simple. Exactly as Peter Solomon
had promised, the golden capstone was a potent talisman with the power to bring order from chaos.
Langdon began pounding on the lid and shouting, “I know! I know!”
Above him, the stone pyramid lifted off and hovered away. In its place, the tattooed face reappeared, its
chilling visage staring down through the small window.
“I solved it!” Langdon shouted. “Let me out!”
When the tattooed man spoke, Langdon’s submerged ears heard nothing. His eyes, however, saw the lips
speak two words. “Tell me.”
“I will!” Langdon screamed, the water almost to his eyes. “Let me out! I’ll explain everything!” It’s so
simple.
The man’s lips moved again. “Tell me now . . . or die.”
With the water rising through the final inch of air space, Langdon tipped his head back to keep his mouth
above the waterline. As he did so, warm liquid poured into his eyes, blurring his vision. Arching his back, he
pressed his mouth against the Plexiglas window.
Then, with his last few seconds of air, Robert Langdon shared the secret of how to decipher the Masonic
Pyramid.
As he finished speaking, the liquid rose around his lips. Instinctively, Langdon drew a final breath and
clamped his mouth shut. A moment later, the fluid covered him entirely, reaching the top of his tomb and
spreading out across the Plexiglas.
He did it, Mal’akh realized. Langdon figured out how to solve the pyramid.
The answer was so simple. So obvious.
Beneath the window, the submerged face of Robert Langdon stared up at him with desperate and beseeching
eyes.
Mal’akh shook his head at him and slowly mouthed the words: “Thank you, Professor. Enjoy the afterlife.”
CHAPTER 103
As a serious swimmer, Robert Langdon had often wondered what it would feel like to drown. He now knew
he was going to learn firsthand. Although he could hold his breath longer than most people, he could already
feel his body reacting to the absence of air. Carbon dioxide was accumulating in his blood, bringing with it
the instinctual urge to inhale. Do not breathe! The reflex to inhale was increasing in intensity with each
passing moment. Langdon knew very soon he would reach what was called the breath-hold breakpoint—that
critical moment at which a person could no longer voluntarily hold his breath.
Open the lid! Langdon’s instinct was to pound and struggle, but he knew better than to waste valuable
oxygen. All he could do was stare up through the blur of water above him and hope. The world outside was
now only a hazy patch of light above the Plexiglas window. His core muscles had begun burning, and he
knew hypoxia was setting in.
Suddenly a beautiful and ghostly face appeared, gazing down at him. It was Katherine, her soft features
looking almost ethereal through the veil of liquid. Their eyes met through the Plexiglas window, and for an
instant, Langdon thought he was saved. Katherine! Then he heard her muted cries of horror and realized she
was being held there by their captor. The tattooed monster was forcing her to bear witness to what was about
to happen.
Katherine, I’m sorry . . .
In this strange, dark place, trapped underwater, Langdon strained to comprehend that these would be his final
moments of life. Soon he would cease to exist . . . everything he was . . . or had ever been . . . or would ever
be . . . was ending. When his brain died, all of the memories held in his gray matter, along with all of the
knowledge he had acquired, would simply evaporate in a flood of chemical reactions.
In this moment, Robert Langdon realized his true insignificance in the universe. It was as lonely and
humbling a feeling as he had ever
experienced. Almost thankfully, he could feel the breath-hold breakpoint arriving.
The moment was upon him.
Langdon’s lungs forced out their spent contents, collapsing in eager preparation to inhale. Still he held out an
instant longer. His final second. Then, like a man no longer able to hold his hand to a burning stove, he gave
himself over to fate.
Reflex overruled reason.
His lips parted.
His lungs expanded.
And the liquid came pouring in.
The pain that filled his chest was greater than Langdon had ever imagined. The liquid burned as it poured
into his lungs. Instantly, the pain shot upward into his skull, and he felt like his head was being crushed in a
vise. There was great thundering in his ears, and through it all, Katherine Solomon was screaming.
There was a blinding flash of light.
And then blackness.
Robert Langdon was gone.
CHAPTER 104
It’s over.
Katherine Solomon had stopped screaming. The drowning she had just witnessed had left her catatonic,
virtually paralyzed with shock and despair.
Beneath the Plexiglas window, Langdon’s dead eyes stared past her into empty space. His frozen expression
was one of pain and regret. The last tiny air bubbles trickled out of his lifeless mouth, and then, as if
consenting to give up his ghost, the Harvard professor slowly began sinking to the bottom of the tank . . .
where he disappeared into the shadows.
He’s gone. Katherine felt numb.
The tattooed man reached down, and with pitiless finality, he slid the small viewing window closed, sealing
Langdon’s corpse inside.
Then he smiled at her. “Shall we?”
Before Katherine could respond, he hoisted her grief-stricken body onto his shoulder, turned out the light,
and carried her out of the room. With a few powerful strides, he transported her to the end of the hall, into a
large space that seemed to be bathed in a reddish-purple light. The room smelled like incense. He carried her
to a square table in the center of the room and dropped her hard on her back, knocking the wind out of her.
The surface felt rough and cold. Is this stone?
Katherine had hardly gotten her bearings before the man had removed the wire from her wrists and ankles.
Instinctively, she attempted to fight him off, but her cramped arms and legs barely responded. He now began
strapping her to the table with heavy leather bands, cinching one strap across her knees and then buckling a
second across her hips, pinning her arms at her sides. Then he placed a final strap across her sternum, just
above her breasts.
It had all taken only moments, and Katherine was again immobilized. Her wrists and ankles throbbed now as
the circulation returned to her limbs.
“Open your mouth,” the man whispered, licking his own tattooed lips.
Katherine clenched her teeth in revulsion.
The man again reached out with his index finger and ran it slowly around her lips, making her skin crawl.
She clenched her teeth tighter. The tattooed man chuckled and, using his other hand, found a pressure point
on her neck and squeezed. Katherine’s jaw instantly dropped open. She could feel his finger entering her
mouth and running along her tongue. She gagged and tried to bite it, but the finger was already gone. Still
grinning, he raised his moist fingertip before her eyes. Then he closed his eyes and, once again, rubbed her
saliva into the bare circle of flesh on his head.
The man sighed and slowly opened his eyes. Then, with an eerie calm, he turned and left the room.
In the sudden silence, Katherine could feel her heart pounding. Directly over her, an unusual series of lights
seemed to be modulating from purple red to a deep crimson, illuminating the room’s low ceiling. When she
saw the ceiling, all she could do was stare. Every inch was covered with drawings. The mind-boggling
collage above her appeared to depict the celestial sky. Stars, planets, and constellations mingled with
astrological symbols, charts, and formulas. There were arrows predicting elliptical orbits, geometric symbols
indicating angles of ascension, and zodiacal creatures peering down at her. It looked like a mad scientist had
gotten loose in the Sistine Chapel.
Turning her head, Katherine looked away, but the wall to her left was no better. A series of candles on
medieval floor stands shed a flickering glow on a wall that was completely hidden beneath pages of text,
photos, and drawings. Some of the pages looked like papyrus or vellum torn from ancient books; others were
obviously from newer texts; mixed in were photographs, drawings, maps, and schematics; all of them
appeared to have been glued to the wall with meticulous care. A spiderweb of strings had been thumbtacked
across them, interconnecting them in limitless chaotic possibilities.
Katherine again looked away, turning her head in the other direction.
Unfortunately, this provided the most terrifying view of all.
Adjacent to the stone slab on which she was strapped, there stood a small side counter that instantly
reminded her of an instrument table from a hospital operating room. On the counter was arranged a series of
objects—among them a syringe, a vial of dark liquid . . . and a large knife with a bone handle and a blade
hewn of iron burnished to an unusually high shine.
My God . . . what is he planning to do to me?
CHAPTER 105
When CIA systems security specialist Rick Parrish finally loped into Nola Kaye’s office, he was carrying a
single sheet of paper.
“What took you so long?!” Nola demanded. I told you to come down immediately!
“Sorry,” he said, pushing up his bottle-bottom glasses on his long nose. “I was trying to gather more
information for you, but—”
“Just show me what you’ve got.”
Parrish handed her the printout. “It’s a redaction, but you get the gist.”
Nola scanned the page in amazement.
“I’m still trying to figure out how a hacker got access,” Parrish said, “but it looks like a delegator spider
hijacked one of our search—”
“Forget that!” Nola blurted, glancing up from the page. “What the hell is the CIA doing with a classified file
about pyramids, ancient portals, and engraved symbolons?”
“That’s what took me so long. I was trying to see what document was being targeted, so I traced the file
path.” Parrish paused, clearing his throat. “This document turns out to be on a partition personally assigned
to . . . the CIA director himself.”
Nola wheeled, staring in disbelief. Sato’s boss has a file about the Masonic Pyramid? She knew that the
current director, along with many other top CIA executives, was a high-ranking Mason, but Nola could not
imagine any of them keeping Masonic secrets on a CIA computer.
Then again, considering what she had witnessed in the last twenty-four hours, anything was possible.
Agent Simkins was lying on his stomach, ensconced in the bushes of Franklin Square. His eyes were trained
on the columned entry of the Almas Temple. Nothing. No lights had come on inside, and no one had
approached the door. He turned his head and checked on Bellamy. The man was pacing alone in the middle
of the park, looking cold. Really cold. Simkins could see him shaking and shivering.
His phone vibrated. It was Sato.
“How overdue is our target?” she demanded.
Simkins checked his chronograph. “Target said twenty minutes. It’s been almost forty. Something’s wrong.”
“He’s not coming,” Sato said. “It’s over.”
Simkins knew she was right. “Any word from Hartmann?”
“No, he never checked in from Kalorama Heights. I can’t reach him.”
Simkins stiffened. If this was true, then something was definitely wrong.
“I just called field support,” Sato said, “and they can’t find him either.”
Holy shit. “Do they have a GPS location on the Escalade?”
“Yeah. A residential address in Kalorama Heights,” Sato said. “Gather your men. We’re pulling out.”
Sato clicked off her phone and gazed out at the majestic skyline of her nation’s capital. An icy wind whipped
through her light jacket, and she wrapped her arms around herself to stay warm. Director Inoue Sato was not
a woman who often felt cold . . . or fear. At the moment, however, she was feeling both.
CHAPTER 106
Mal’akh wore only his silk loincloth as he dashed up the ramp, through the steel door, and out through the
painting into his living room. I need to prepare quickly. He glanced over at the dead CIA agent in the foyer.
This home is no longer safe.
Carrying the stone pyramid in one hand, Mal’akh strode directly to his first-floor study and sat down at his
laptop computer. As he logged in, he pictured Langdon downstairs and wondered how many days or even
weeks would pass before the submerged corpse was discovered in the secret basement. It made no difference.
Mal’akh would be long gone by then.
Langdon has served his role . . . brilliantly.
Not only had Langdon reunited the pieces of the Masonic Pyramid, he had figured out how to solve the
arcane grid of symbols on the base. At first glance, the symbols seemed indecipherable . . . and yet the
answer was simple . . . staring them in the face.
Mal’akh’s laptop sprang to life, the screen displaying the same e-mail he had received earlier—a photograph
of a glowing capstone, partially blocked by Warren Bellamy’s finger.
The
secret hides
within The Order.
Franklin Square.
Eight . . . Franklin Square, Katherine had told Mal’akh. She had also admitted that CIA agents were staking
out Franklin Square, hoping to capture Mal’akh and also figure out what order was being referenced by the
capstone. The Masons? The Shriners? The Rosicrucians?
None of these, Mal’akh now knew. Langdon saw the truth.
Ten minutes earlier, with liquid rising around his face, the Harvard professor had figured out the key to
solving the pyramid. “The Order Eight Franklin Square!” he had shouted, terror in his eyes. “The secret hides
within The Order Eight Franklin Square!”
At first, Mal’akh failed to understand his meaning.
“It’s not an address!” Langdon yelled, his mouth pressed to the Plexiglas window. “The Order Eight Franklin
Square! It’s a magic square!” Then he said something about Albrecht Dürer . . . and how the pyramid’s first
code was a clue to breaking this final one.
Mal’akh was familiar with magic squares—kameas, as the early mystics called them. The ancient text De
Occulta Philosophia described in detail the mystical power of magic squares and the methods for designing
powerful sigils based on magical grids of numbers. Now Langdon was telling him that a magic square held
the key to deciphering the base of the pyramid?
“You need an eight-by-eight magic square!” the professor had been yelling, his lips the only part of his body
above the liquid. “Magic squares are categorized in orders! A three-by-three square is an ‘order three’! A
four-by-four square is an ‘order four’! You need an ‘order eight’!”
The liquid had been about to engulf Langdon entirely, and the professor drew one last desperate breath and
shouted out something about a famous Mason . . . an American forefather . . . a scientist, mystic,
mathematician, inventor . . . as well as the creator of the mystical kamea that bore his name to this day.
Franklin.
In a flash, Mal’akh knew Langdon was right.
Now, breathless with anticipation, Mal’akh sat upstairs at his laptop. He ran a quick Web search, received
dozens of hits, chose one, and began reading.
THE ORDER EIGHT FRANKLIN SQUARE
One of history’s best-known magic squares is the order-eight square published in 1769 by American scientist
Benjamin Franklin, and which became famous for its inclusion of never-before-seen “bent diagonal
summations.” Franklin’s obsession with this mystical art form most likely stemmed from his personal
associations with the prominent alchemists and mystics of his day, as well as his own belief in astrology,
which were the underpinnings for the predictions made in his Poor Richard’s Almanack.
Mal’akh studied Franklin’s famous creation—a unique arrangement of the numbers 1 through 64—in which
every row, column, and diagonal added up to the same magical constant. The secret hides within The Order
Eight Franklin Square.
Mal’akh smiled. Trembling with excitement, he grabbed the stone pyramid and flipped it over, examining the
base.
These sixty-four symbols needed to be reorganized and arranged in a different order, their sequence defined
by the numbers in Franklin’s magic square. Although Mal’akh could not imagine how this chaotic grid of
symbols would suddenly make sense in a different order, he had faith in the ancient promise.
Ordo ab chao.
Heart racing, he took out a sheet of paper and quickly drew an empty eight-by-eight grid. Then he began
inserting the symbols, one by one, in their newly defined positions. Almost immediately, to his astonishment,
the grid began making sense.
Order from chaos!
He completed the entire decryption and stared in disbelief at the solution before him. A stark image had
taken shape. The jumbled grid had been transformed . . . reorganized . . . and although Mal’akh could not
grasp the meaning of the entire message, he understood enough . . . enough to know exactly where he was
now headed.
The pyramid points the way.
The grid pointed to one of the world’s great mystical locations. Incredibly, it was the same location at which
Mal’akh had always fantasized he would complete his journey.
Destiny.
CHAPTER 107
The stone table felt cold beneath Katherine Solomon’s back.
Horrifying images of Robert’s death continued to swirl through her mind, along with thoughts of her brother.
Is Peter dead, too? The strange knife on the nearby table kept bringing flashes of what might lie in store for
her as well.
Is this really the end?
Oddly, her thoughts turned abruptly to her research . . . to Noetic Science . . . and to her recent
breakthroughs. All of it lost . . . up in smoke. She would never be able to share with the world everything she
had learned. Her most shocking discovery had taken place only a few months ago, and the results had the
potential to redefine the way humans thought about death. Strangely, thinking now of that experiment . . .
was bringing her an unexpected solace.
As a young girl, Katherine Solomon had often wondered if there was life after death. Does heaven exist?
What happens when we die? As she grew older, her studies in science quickly erased any fanciful notions of
heaven, hell, or the afterlife. The concept of “life after death,” she came to accept, was a human construct . . .
a fairy tale designed to soften the horrifying truth that was our mortality.
Or so I believed . . .
A year ago, Katherine and her brother had been discussing one of philosophy’s most enduring questions—the
existence of the human soul—specifically the issue of whether or not humans possessed some kind of
consciousness capable of survival outside of the body.
They both sensed that such a human soul probably did exist. Most ancient philosophies concurred. Buddhist
and Brahminical wisdom endorsed metempsychosis—the transmigration of the soul into a new body after
death; Platonists defined the body as a “prison” from which the soul escaped; and the Stoics called the soul
apospasma tou theu—“a particle of God”—and believed it was recalled by God upon death.
The existence of the human soul, Katherine noted with some
frustration, was probably a concept that would never be scientifically proven. Confirming that a
consciousness survived outside the human body after death was akin to exhaling a puff of smoke and hoping
to find it years later.
After their discussion, Katherine had a strange notion. Her brother had mentioned the Book of Genesis and
its description of the soul as Neshemah—a kind of spiritual “intelligence” that was separate from the body. It
occurred to Katherine that the word intelligence suggested the presence of thought. Noetic Science clearly
suggested that thoughts had mass, and so it stood to reason, then, that the human soul might therefore also
have mass.
Can I weigh a human soul?
The notion was impossible, of course . . . foolish even to ponder.
It was three days later that Katherine suddenly woke up from a dead sleep and sat bolt upright in bed. She
jumped up, drove to her lab, and immediately began work designing an experiment that was both startlingly
simple . . . and frighteningly bold.
She had no idea if it would work, and she decided not to tell Peter about her idea until her work was
complete. It took four months, but finally Katherine brought her brother into the lab. She wheeled out a large
piece of gear that she had been keeping hidden in the back storage room.
“I designed and built it myself,” she said, showing Peter her invention. “Any guesses?”
Her brother stared at the strange machine. “An incubator?”
Katherine laughed and shook her head, although it was a reasonable guess. The machine did look a bit like
the transparent incubators for premature babies one saw in hospitals. This machine, however, was adult
size—a long, airtight, clear plastic capsule, like some kind of futuristic sleeping pod. It sat atop a large piece
of electronic gear.
“See if this helps you guess,” Katherine said, plugging the contraption into a power source. A digital display
lit up on the machine, its numbers jumping around as she carefully calibrated some dials.
When she was done, the display read:
0.0000000000 kg
“A scale?” Peter asked, looking puzzled.
“Not just any scale.” Katherine took a tiny scrap of paper off a nearby counter and laid it gently on top of the
capsule. The numbers on the display jumped around again and then settled on a new reading.
.0008194325 kg
“High-precision microbalance,” she said. “Resolution down to a few micrograms.”
Peter still looked puzzled. “You built a precise scale for . . . a person?”
“Exactly.” She lifted the transparent lid on the machine. “If I place a person inside this capsule and close the
lid, the individual is in an entirely sealed system. Nothing gets in or out. No gas, no liquid, no dust particles.
Nothing can escape—not the person’s breath exhalations, evaporating sweat, body fluids, nothing.”
Peter ran a hand through his thick head of silver hair, a nervous mannerism shared by Katherine. “Hmm . . .
obviously a person would die in there pretty quickly.”
She nodded. “Six minutes or so, depending on their breathing rate.”
He turned to her. “I don’t get it.”
She smiled. “You will.”
Leaving the machine behind, Katherine led Peter into the Cube’s control room and sat him down in front of
the plasma wall. She began typing and accessed a series of video files stored on the holographic drives.
When the plasma wall flickered to life, the image before them looked like home-video footage.
The camera panned across a modest bedroom with an unmade bed, medication bottles, a respirator, and a
heart monitor. Peter looked baffled as the camera kept panning and finally revealed, near the center of the
bedroom, Katherine’s scale contraption.
Peter’s eyes widened. “What the . . . ?”
The capsule’s transparent lid was open, and a very old man in an oxygen mask lay inside. His elderly wife
and a hospice worker stood beside the pod. The man’s breathing was labored, and his eyes were closed.
“The man in the capsule was a science teacher of mine at Yale,” Katherine said. “He and I have kept in touch
over the years. He’s been very ill. He always said he wanted to donate his body to science, so when I
explained my idea for this experiment, he immediately wanted to be a part of it.”
Peter was apparently mute with shock as he stared at the scene unfolding before them.
The hospice worker now turned to the man’s wife. “It’s time. He’s ready.”
The old woman dabbed her tearful eyes and nodded with a resolute calm. “Okay.”
Very gently, the hospice worker reached into the pod and removed the
man’s oxygen mask. The man stirred slightly, but his eyes remained closed. Now the worker wheeled the
respirator and other equipment off to the side, leaving the old man in the capsule totally isolated in the center
of the room.
The dying man’s wife now approached the pod, leaned down, and gently kissed her husband’s forehead. The
old man did not open his eyes, but his lips moved, ever so slightly, into a faint, loving smile.
Without his oxygen mask, the man’s breathing was quickly becoming more labored. The end was obviously
near. With an admirable strength and calm, the man’s wife slowly lowered the transparent lid of the capsule
and sealed it shut, exactly as Katherine had taught her.
Peter recoiled in alarm. “Katherine, what in the name of God?!”
“It’s okay,” Katherine whispered. “There’s plenty of air in the capsule.” She had seen this video dozens of
times now, but it still made her pulse race. She pointed to the scale beneath the dying man’s sealed pod. The
digital numbers read:
51.4534644 kg
“That’s his body weight,” Katherine said.
The old man’s breathing became more shallow, and Peter inched forward, transfixed.
“This is what he wanted,” Katherine whispered. “Watch what happens.”
The man’s wife had stepped back and was now seated on the bed, silently looking on with the hospice
worker.
Over the course of the next sixty seconds, the man’s shallow breathing grew faster, until all at once, as if the
man himself had chosen the moment, he simply took his last breath. Everything stopped.
It was over.
The wife and hospice worker quietly comforted each other.
Nothing else happened.
After a few seconds, Peter glanced over at Katherine in apparent confusion.
Wait for it, she thought, redirecting Peter’s gaze to the capsule’s digital display, which still quietly glowed,
showing the dead man’s weight.
Then it happened.
When Peter saw it, he jolted backward, almost falling out of his chair. “But . . . that’s . . .” He covered his
mouth in shock. “I can’t . . .”
It was seldom that the great Peter Solomon was speechless. Katherine’s reaction had been similar the first
few times she saw what had happened.
Moments after the man’s death, the numbers on the scale had decreased suddenly. The man had become
lighter immediately after his death. The weight change was minuscule, but it was measurable . . . and the
implications were utterly mind-boggling.
Katherine recalled writing in her lab notes with a trembling hand: “There seems to exist an invisible
‘material’ that exits the human body at the moment of death. It has quantifiable mass which is unimpeded by
physical barriers. I must assume it moves in a dimension I cannot yet perceive.”
From the expression of shock on her brother’s face, Katherine knew he understood the implications.
“Katherine . . .” he stammered, blinking his gray eyes as if to make sure he was not dreaming. “I think you
just weighed the human soul.”
There was a long silence between them.
Katherine sensed that her brother was attempting to process all the stark and wondrous ramifications. It will
take time. If what they had just witnessed was indeed what it seemed to be—that is, evidence that a soul or
consciousness or life force could move outside the realm of the body—then a startling new light had just
been shed on countless mystical questions: transmigration, cosmic consciousness, near-death experiences,
astral projection, remote viewing, lucid dreaming, and on and on. Medical journals were filled with stories of
patients who had died on the operating table, viewed their bodies from above, and then been brought back to
life.
Peter was silent, and Katherine now saw he had tears in his eyes. She understood. She had cried, too. Peter
and Katherine had lost loved ones, and for anyone in that position, the faintest hint of the human spirit
continuing after death brought a glimmer of hope.
He’s thinking of Zachary, Katherine thought, recognizing the deep melancholy in her brother’s eyes. For
years Peter had carried the burden of responsibility for his son’s death. He had told Katherine many times
that leaving Zachary in prison had been the worst mistake of his life, and that he would never find a way to
forgive himself.
A slamming door drew Katherine’s attention, and suddenly she was back in the basement, lying on a cold
stone table. The metal door at the top of the ramp had closed loudly, and the tattooed man was coming back
down. She could hear him entering one of the rooms down the hall, doing something inside, and then
continuing along the hall toward the room she was in. As he entered, she could see that he was pushing
something in front of him. Something heavy . . . on wheels. As he stepped into the light, she stared in
disbelief. The tattooed man was pushing a person in a wheelchair.
Intellectually, Katherine’s brain recognized the man in the chair. Emotionally, her mind could barely accept
what she was looking at.
Peter?
She didn’t know whether to be overjoyed that her brother was alive . . . or utterly horrified. Peter’s body had
been shaved smooth. His mane of thick silver hair was all gone, as were his eyebrows, and his smooth skin
glistened as if it had been oiled. He wore a black silk gown. Where his right hand should have been, he had
only a stump, wrapped in a clean, fresh bandage. Her brother’s pain-laden eyes reached out to hers, filled
with regret and sorrow.
“Peter!” Her voice cracked.
Her brother tried to speak but made only muffled, guttural noises. Katherine now realized he was bound to
the wheelchair and had been gagged.
The tattooed man reached down and gently stroked Peter’s shaved scalp. “I’ve prepared your brother for a
great honor. He has a role to play tonight.”
Katherine’s entire body went rigid. No . . .
“Peter and I will be leaving in a moment, but I thought you’d want to say good-bye.”
“Where are you taking him?” she said weakly.
He smiled. “Peter and I must journey to the sacred mountain. That is where the treasure lies. The Masonic
Pyramid has revealed the location. Your friend Robert Langdon was most helpful.”
Katherine looked into her brother’s eyes. “He killed . . . Robert.”
Her brother’s expression contorted in agony, and he shook his head violently, as if unable to bear any more
pain.
“Now, now, Peter,” the man said, again stroking Peter’s scalp. “Don’t let this ruin the moment. Say good-bye
to your little sister. This is your final family reunion.”
Katherine felt her mind welling with desperation. “Why are you doing this?!” she shouted at him. “What
have we ever done to you?! Why do you hate my family so much?!”
The tattooed man came over and placed his mouth right next to her ear. “I have my reasons, Katherine.”
Then he walked to the side table and picked up the strange knife. He brought it over to her and ran the
burnished blade across her cheek. “This is arguably the most famous knife in history.”
Katherine knew of no famous knives, but it looked foreboding and ancient. The blade felt razor sharp.
“Don’t worry,” he said. “I have no intention of wasting its power on you.
I’m saving it for a more worthy sacrifice . . . in a more sacred place.” He turned to her brother. “Peter, you
recognize this knife, don’t you?”
Her brother’s eyes were wide with a mixture of fear and disbelief.
“Yes, Peter, this ancient artifact still exists. I obtained it at great expense . . . and I have been saving it for
you. At long last, you and I can end our painful journey together.”
With that, he wrapped the knife carefully in a cloth with all of his other items—incense, vials of liquid, white
satin cloths, and other ceremonial objects. He then placed the wrapped items inside Robert Langdon’s leather
bag along with the Masonic Pyramid and capstone. Katherine looked on helplessly as the man zipped up
Langdon’s daybag and turned to her brother.
“Carry this, Peter, would you?” He set the heavy bag on Peter’s lap.
Next, the man walked over to a drawer and began rooting around. She could hear small metal objects
clinking. When he returned, he took her right arm, steadying it. Katherine couldn’t see what he was doing,
but Peter apparently could, and he again started bucking wildly.
Katherine felt a sudden, sharp pinch in the crook of her right elbow, and an eerie warmth ran down around it.
Peter was making anguished, strangled sounds and trying in vain to get out of the heavy chair. Katherine felt
a cold numbness spreading through her forearm and fingertips below the elbow.
When the man stepped aside, Katherine saw why her brother was so horrified. The tattooed man had inserted
a medical needle into her vein, as if she were giving blood. The needle, however, was not attached to a tube.
Instead, her blood was now flowing freely out of it . . . running down her elbow, forearm, and onto the stone
table.
“A human hourglass,” the man said, turning to Peter. “In a short while, when I ask you to play your role, I
want you to picture Katherine . . . dying alone here in the dark.”
Peter’s expression was one of total torment.
“She will stay alive,” the man said, “for about an hour or so. If you cooperate with me quickly, I will have
enough time to save her. Of course, if you resist me at all . . . your sister will die here alone in the dark.”
Peter bellowed unintelligibly through his gag.
“I know, I know,” the tattooed man said, placing a hand on Peter’s shoulder, “this is hard for you. But it
shouldn’t be. After all, this is not the first time you will abandon a family member.” He paused, bending over
and whispering in Peter’s ear. “I’m thinking, of course, of your son, Zachary, in Soganlik prison.”
Peter pulled against his restraints and let out another muffled scream through the cloth in his mouth.
“Stop it!” Katherine shouted.
“I remember that night well,” the man taunted as he finished packing. “I heard the whole thing. The warden
offered to let your son go, but you chose to teach Zachary a lesson . . . by abandoning him. Your boy learned
his lesson, all right, didn’t he?” The man smiled. “His loss . . . was my gain.”
The man now retrieved a linen cloth and stuffed it deep into Katherine’s mouth. “Death,” he whispered to
her, “should be a quiet thing.”
Peter struggled violently. Without another word, the tattooed man slowly backed Peter’s wheelchair out of
the room, giving Peter a long, last look at his sister.
Katherine and Peter locked eyes one final time.
Then he was gone.
Katherine could hear them going up the ramp and through the metal door. As they exited, she heard the
tattooed man lock the metal door behind him and continue on through the painting of the Three Graces. A
few minutes later, she heard a car start.
Then the mansion fell silent.
All alone in the dark, Katherine lay bleeding.
CHAPTER 108
Robert Langdon’s mind hovered in an endless abyss.
No light. No sound. No feeling.
Only an infinite and silent void.
Softness.
Weightlessness.
His body had released him. He was untethered.
The physical world had ceased to exist. Time had ceased to exist.
He was pure consciousness now . . . a fleshless sentience suspended in the emptiness of a vast universe.
CHAPTER 109
The modified UH-60 skimmed in low over the expansive rooftops of Kalorama Heights, thundering toward
the coordinates given to them by the support team. Agent Simkins was the first to spot the black Escalade
parked haphazardly on a lawn in front of one of the mansions. The driveway gate was closed, and the house
was dark and quiet.
Sato gave the signal to touch down.
The aircraft landed hard on the front lawn amid several other vehicles . . . one of them a security sedan with a
bubble light on top.
Simkins and his team jumped out, drew their weapons, and dashed up onto the porch. Finding the front door
locked, Simkins cupped his hands and peered through a window. The foyer was dark, but Simkins could
make out the faint shadow of a body on the floor.
“Shit,” he whispered. “It’s Hartmann.”
One of his agents grabbed a chair off the porch and heaved it through the bay window. The sound of
shattering glass was barely audible over the roar of the helicopter behind them. Seconds later, they were all
inside. Simkins rushed to the foyer and knelt over Hartmann to check his pulse. Nothing. There was blood
everywhere. Then he saw the screwdriver in Hartmann’s throat.
Jesus. He stood up and motioned to his men to begin a full search.
The agents fanned out across the first floor, their laser sights probing the darkness of the luxurious house.
They found nothing in the living room or study, but in the dining room, to their surprise, they discovered a
strangled female security guard. Simkins was fast losing hope that Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon
were alive. This brutal killer clearly had set a trap, and if he had managed to kill a CIA agent and an armed
security guard, then it seemed a professor and a scientist had no chance.
Once the first floor was secure, Simkins sent two agents to search upstairs. Meanwhile, he found a set of
basement stairs off the kitchen and descended. At the bottom of the stairs, he threw on the lights. The
basement was spacious and spotless, as if it were hardly ever used. Boilers, bare cement walls, a few boxes.
Nothing here at all. Simkins headed back up to the kitchen just as his men were coming down from the
second floor. Everyone shook their heads.
The house was deserted.
No one home. And no more bodies.
Simkins radioed Sato with the all-clear and the grim update.
When he got to the foyer, Sato was already climbing the stairs onto the porch. Warren Bellamy was visible
behind her, sitting dazed and alone in the helicopter with Sato’s titanium briefcase at his feet. The OS
director’s secure laptop provided her with worldwide access to CIA computer systems via encrypted satellite
uplinks. Earlier tonight, she had used this computer to share with Bellamy some kind of information that had
stunned the man into cooperating fully. Simkins had no idea what Bellamy had seen, but whatever it was, the
Architect had been visibly shell-shocked ever since.
As Sato entered the foyer, she paused a moment, bowing her head over Hartmann’s body. A moment later,
she raised her eyes and fixed them on Simkins. “No sign of Langdon or Katherine? Or Peter Solomon?”
Simkins shook his head. “If they’re still alive, he took them with him.”
“Did you see a computer in the house?”
“Yes, ma’am. In the office.”
“Show me.”
Simkins led Sato out of the foyer and into the living room. The plush carpet was covered with broken glass
from the shattered bay window. They walked past a fireplace, a large painting, and several bookshelves to an
office door. The office was wood paneled, with an antique desk and a large computer monitor. Sato walked
around behind the desk and eyed the screen, immediately scowling.
“Damn it,” she said under her breath.
Simkins circled around and looked at the screen. It was blank. “What’s wrong?”
Sato pointed to an empty docking station on the desk. “He uses a laptop. He took it with him.”
Simkins didn’t follow. “Does he have information you want to see?”
“No,” Sato replied, her tone grave. “He has information I want nobody to see.”
Downstairs in the hidden basement, Katherine Solomon had heard the sounds of helicopter blades followed
by breaking glass and heavy boots on the floor above her. She tried to cry out for help, but the gag in her
mouth made it impossible. She could barely make a sound. The harder she tried, the faster the blood began
flowing from her elbow.
She was feeling short of breath and a little dizzy.
Katherine knew she needed to calm down. Use your mind, Katherine. With all of her intention, she coaxed
herself into a meditative state.
Robert Langdon’s mind floated through the emptiness of space. He peered into the infinite void, searching
for any points of reference. He found nothing.
Total darkness. Total silence. Total peace.
There was not even the pull of gravity to tell him which way was up.
His body was gone.
This must be death.
Time seemed to be telescoping, stretching and compressing, as if it had no bearings in this place. He had lost
all track of how much time had passed.
Ten seconds? Ten minutes? Ten days?
Suddenly, however, like distant fiery explosions in far-off galaxies, memories began to materialize, billowing
toward Langdon like shock waves across a vast nothingness.
All at once, Robert Langdon began to remember. The images tore through him . . . vivid and disturbing. He
was staring up at a face that was covered with tattoos. A pair of powerful hands lifted his head and smashed
it into the floor.
Pain erupted . . . and then darkness.
Gray light.
Throbbing.
Wisps of memory. Langdon was being dragged, half conscious, down, down, down. His captor was chanting
something.
Verbum significatium . . . Verbum omnificum . . . Verbum perdo . . .
CHAPTER 110
Director Sato stood alone in the study, waiting while the CIA satellite-imaging division processed her
request. One of the luxuries of working in the D.C. area was the satellite coverage. With luck, one of them
might have been properly positioned to get photos of this home tonight . . . possibly capturing a vehicle
leaving the place in the last half hour.
“Sorry, ma’am,” the satellite technician said. “No coverage of those coordinates tonight. Do you want to
make a reposition request?”
“No thanks. Too late.” She hung up.
Sato exhaled, now having no idea how they would figure out where their target had gone. She walked out to
the foyer, where her men had bagged Agent Hartmann’s body and were carrying it toward the chopper. Sato
had ordered Agent Simkins to gather his men and prepare for the return to Langley, but Simkins was in the
living room on his hands and knees. He looked like he was ill.
“You okay?”
He glanced up, an odd look on his face. “Did you see this?” He pointed at the living-room floor.
Sato came over and looked down at the plush carpet. She shook her head, seeing nothing.
“Crouch down,” Simkins said. “Look at the nap of the carpet.”
She did. After a moment, she saw it. The fibers of the carpet looked like they had been mashed down . . .
depressed along two straight lines as if the wheels of something heavy had been rolled across the room.
“The strange thing,” Simkins said, “is where the tracks go.” He pointed.
Sato’s gaze followed the faint parallel lines across the living-room carpet. The tracks seemed to disappear
beneath a large floor-to-ceiling painting that hung beside the fireplace. What in the world?
Simkins walked over to the painting and tried to lift it down from the wall. It didn’t budge. “It’s fixed,” he
said, now running his fingers around the edges. “Hold on, there’s something underneath . . .” His finger hit a
small lever beneath the bottom edge, and something clicked.
Sato stepped forward as Simkins pushed the frame and the entire painting rotated slowly on its center, like a
revolving door.
He raised his flashlight and shined it into the dark space beyond.
Sato’s eyes narrowed. Here we go.
At the end of a short corridor stood a heavy metal door.
The memories that had billowed through the blackness of Langdon’s mind had come and gone. In their wake,
a trail of red-hot sparks was swirling, along with the same eerie, distant whisper.
Verbum significatium . . . Verbum omnificum . . . Verbum perdo.
The chanting continued like the drone of voices in a medieval canticle.
Verbum significatium . . . Verbum omnificum. The words now tumbled through the empty void, fresh voices
echoing all around him.
Apocalypsis . . . Franklin . . . Apocalypsis . . . Verbum . . . Apocalypsis . . .
Without warning, a mournful bell began tolling somewhere in the distance. The bell rang on and on, growing
louder. It tolled more urgently now, as if hoping Langdon would understand, as if urging his mind to follow.
CHAPTER 111
The tolling bell in the clock tower rang for three full minutes, rattling the crystal chandelier that hung above
Langdon’s head. Decades ago, he had attended lectures in this well-loved assembly hall at Phillips Exeter
Academy. Today, however, he was here to listen to a dear friend address the student body. As the lights
dimmed, Langdon took a seat against the back wall, beneath a pantheon of headmaster portraits.
A hush fell across the crowd.
In total darkness, a tall, shadowy figure crossed the stage and took the podium. “Good morning,” the faceless
voice whispered into the microphone.
Everyone sat up, straining to see who was addressing them.
A slide projector flashed to life, revealing a faded sepia photograph—a dramatic castle with a red sandstone
facade, high square towers, and Gothic embellishments.
The shadow spoke again. “Who can tell me where this is?”
“England!” a girl declared in the darkness. “This facade is a blend of early Gothic and late Romanesque,
making this the quintessential Norman castle and placing it in England at about the twelfth century.”
“Wow,” the faceless voice replied. “Someone knows her architecture.”
Quiet groans all around.
“Unfortunately,” the shadow added, “you missed by three thousand miles and half a millennium.”
The room perked up.
The projector now flashed a full-color, modern photo of the same castle from a different angle. The castle’s
Seneca Creek sandstone towers dominated the foreground, but in the background, startlingly close, stood the
majestic, white, columned dome of the U.S. Capitol Building.
“Hold on!” the girl exclaimed. “There’s a Norman castle in D.C.?!”
“Since 1855,” the voice replied. “Which is when this next photo was taken.”
A new slide appeared—a black-and-white interior shot, depicting a massive vaulted ballroom, furnished with
animal skeletons, scientific display cases, glass jars with biological samples, archaeological artifacts, and
plaster casts of prehistoric reptiles.
“This wondrous castle,” the voice said, “was America’s first real science museum. It was a gift to America
from a wealthy British scientist who, like our forefathers, believed our fledgling country could become the
land of enlightenment. He bequeathed to our forefathers a massive fortune and asked them to build at the
core of our nation ‘an establishment for the increase and diffusion of knowledge.’ ” He paused a long
moment. “Who can tell me the name of this generous scientist?”
A timid voice in front ventured, “James Smithson?”
A whisper of recognition rippled through the crowd.
“Smithson indeed,” the man on stage replied. Peter Solomon now stepped into the light, his gray eyes
flashing playfully. “Good morning. My name is Peter Solomon, and I am secretary of the Smithsonian
Institution.”
The students broke into wild applause.
In the shadows, Langdon watched with admiration as Peter captivated the young minds with a photographic
tour of the Smithsonian Institution’s early history. The show began with Smithsonian Castle, its basement
science labs, corridors lined with exhibits, a salon full of mollusks, scientists who called themselves “the
curators of crustaceans,” and even an old photo of the castle’s two most popular residents—a pair of nowdeceased
owls named Diffusion and Increase. The half-hour slide show ended with an impressive satellite
photo of the National Mall, now lined with enormous Smithsonian museums.
“As I said when I began,” Solomon stated in conclusion, “James Smithson and our forefathers envisioned our
great country to be a land of enlightenment. I believe today they would be proud. Their great Smithsonian
Institution stands as a symbol of science and knowledge at the very core of America. It is a living, breathing,
working tribute to our forefathers’ dream for America—a country founded on the principles of knowledge,
wisdom, and science.”
Solomon clicked off the slides to an energetic round of applause. The houselights came up, along with
dozens of eager hands with questions.
Solomon called on a small red-haired boy in the middle.
“Mr. Solomon?” the boy said, sounding puzzled. “You said our forefathers fled the religious oppression of
Europe to establish a country on the principles of scientific advancement.”
“That’s correct.”
“But . . . I was under the impression our forefathers were devoutly religious men who founded America as a
Christian nation.”
Solomon smiled. “My friends, don’t get me wrong, our forefathers were deeply religious men, but they were
Deists—men who believed in God, but in a universal and open-minded way. The only religious ideal they
put forth was religious freedom.” He pulled the microphone from the podium and strode out to the edge of
the stage. “America’s forefathers had a vision of a spiritually enlightened utopia, in which freedom of
thought, education of the masses, and scientific advancement would replace the darkness of outdated
religious superstition.”
A blond girl in back raised her hand.
“Yes?”
“Sir,” the girl said, holding up her cell phone, “I’ve been researching you online, and Wikipedia says you’re
a prominent Freemason.”
Solomon held up his Masonic ring. “I could have saved you the data charges.”
The students laughed.
“Yes, well,” the girl continued, hesitating, “you just mentioned ‘outdated religious superstition,’ and it seems
to me that if anyone is responsible for propagating outdated superstitions . . . it would be the Masons.”
Solomon seemed unfazed. “Oh? How so?”
“Well, I’ve read a lot about Masonry, and I know you’ve got a lot of strange ancient rituals and beliefs. This
article online even says that Masons believe in the power of some kind of ancient magical wisdom . . . which
can elevate man to the realm of the gods?”
Everyone turned and stared at the girl as if she were nuts.
“Actually,” Solomon said, “she’s right.”
The kids all spun around and faced front, eyes widening.
Solomon suppressed a smile and asked the girl, “Does it offer any other Wiki-wisdom about this magical
knowledge?”
The girl looked uneasy now, but she began to read from the Web site. “‘To ensure this powerful wisdom
could not be used by the unworthy, the early adepts wrote down their knowledge in code . . . cloaking its
potent truth in a metaphorical language of symbols, myth, and allegory. To this day, this encrypted wisdom is
all around us . . . encoded in our mythology, our art, and the occult texts of the ages. Unfortunately, modern
man has lost the ability to decipher this complex network of symbolism . . . and the great truth has been
lost.’”
Solomon waited. “That’s all?”
The girl shifted in her seat. “Actually, there is a little bit more.”
“I should hope so. Please . . . tell us.”
The girl looked hesitant, but she cleared her throat and continued. “‘According to legend, the sages who
encrypted the Ancient Mysteries long ago left behind a key of sorts . . . a password that could be used to
unlock the encrypted secrets. This magical password—known as the verbum significatium—is said to hold
the power to lift the darkness and unlock the Ancient Mysteries, opening them to all human understanding.’ ”
Solomon smiled wistfully. “Ah, yes . . . the verbum significatium.” He stared into space for a moment and
then lowered his eyes again to the blond girl. “And where is this wonderful word now?”
The girl looked apprehensive, clearly wishing she had not challenged their guest speaker. She finished
reading. “ ‘Legend holds that the verbum significatium is buried deep underground, where it waits patiently
for a pivotal moment in history . . . a moment when mankind can no longer survive without the truth,
knowledge, and wisdom of the ages. At this dark crossroads, mankind will at last unearth the Word and
herald in a wondrous new age of enlightenment.’ ”
The girl turned off her phone and shrank down in her seat.
After a long silence, another student raised his hand. “Mr. Solomon, you don’t actually believe that, right?”
Solomon smiled. “Why not? Our mythologies have a long tradition of magic words that provide insight and
godlike powers. To this day, children still shout ‘abracadabra’ in hopes of creating something out of nothing.
Of course, we’ve all forgotten that this word is not a toy; it has roots in ancient Aramaic mysticism—Avrah
KaDabra—meaning ‘I create as I speak.’ ”
Silence.
“But, sir,” the student now pressed, “surely you don’t believe that a single word . . . this verbum
significatium . . . whatever it is . . . has the power to unlock ancient wisdom . . . and bring about a worldwide
enlightenment?”
Peter Solomon’s face revealed nothing. “My own beliefs should not concern you. What should concern you
is that this prophecy of a coming enlightenment is echoed in virtually every faith and philosophical tradition
on earth. Hindus call it the Krita Age, astrologers call it the Age of Aquarius, the Jews describe the coming
of the Messiah, theosophists call it the New Age, cosmologists call it Harmonic Convergence and predict the
actual date.”
“December 21, 2012!” someone called.
“Yes, unnervingly soon . . . if you’re a believer in Mayan math.”
Langdon chuckled, recalling how Solomon, ten years ago, had correctly predicted the current spate of
television specials predicting that the year 2012 would mark the End of the World.
“Timing aside,” Solomon said, “I find it wondrous to note that throughout history, all of mankind’s disparate
philosophies have all concurred on one thing—that a great enlightenment is coming. In every culture, in
every era, in every corner of the world, the human dream has focused on the same exact concept—the
coming apotheosis of man . . . the impending transformation of our human minds into their true potentiality.”
He smiled. “What could possibly explain such a synchronicity of beliefs?”
“Truth,” said a quiet voice in the crowd.
Solomon wheeled. “Who said that?”
The hand that went up belonged to a tiny Asian boy whose soft features suggested he might be Nepalese or
Tibetan. “Maybe there is a universal truth embedded in everyone’s soul. Maybe we all have the same story
hiding inside, like a shared constant in our DNA. Maybe this collective truth is responsible for the similarity
in all of our stories.”
Solomon was beaming as he pressed his hands together and bowed reverently to the boy. “Thank you.”
Everyone was quiet.
“Truth,” Solomon said, addressing the room. “Truth has power. And if we all gravitate toward similar ideas,
maybe we do so because those ideas are true . . . written deep within us. And when we hear the truth, even if
we don’t understand it, we feel that truth resonate within us . . . vibrating with our unconscious wisdom.
Perhaps the truth is not learned by us, but rather, the truth is re-called . . . re-membered . . . re-cognized . . .
as that which is already inside us.”
The silence in the hall was complete.
Solomon let it sit for a long moment, then quietly said, “In closing, I should warn you that unveiling the truth
is never easy. Throughout history, every period of enlightenment has been accompanied by darkness,
pushing in opposition. Such are the laws of nature and balance. And if we look at the darkness growing in the
world today, we have to realize that this means there is equal light growing. We are on the verge of a truly
great period of illumination, and all of us—all of you—are profoundly blessed to be living through this
pivotal moment of history. Of all the people who have ever lived, in all the eras in history . . . we are in that
narrow window of time during which we will bear witness to our ultimate renaissance. After millennia of
darkness, we will see our sciences, our minds, and even our religions unveil the truth.”
Solomon was about to get a hearty round of applause when he held up his hand for silence. “Miss?” He
pointed directly to the contentious blond girl in back with the cell phone. “I know you and I didn’t agree on
much, but I want to thank you. Your passion is an important catalyst in the coming changes. Darkness feeds
on apathy . . . and conviction is our most potent antidote. Keep studying your faith. Study the Bible.” He
smiled. “Especially the final pages.”
“The Apocalypse?” she said.
“Absolutely. The Book of Revelation is a vibrant example of our shared truth. The last book of the Bible tells
the identical story as countless other traditions. They all predict the coming unveiling of great wisdom.”
Someone else said, “But isn’t the Apocalypse about the end of the world? You know, the Antichrist,
Armageddon, the final battle between good and evil?”
Solomon chuckled. “Who here studies Greek?”
Several hands went up.
“What does the word apocalypse literally mean?”
“It means,” one student began, and then paused as if surprised. “Apocalypse means ‘to unveil’ . . . or ‘to
reveal.’ ”
Solomon gave the boy a nod of approval. “Exactly. The Apocalypse is literally a reveal-ation. The Book of
Reveal-ation in the Bible predicts an unveiling of great truth and unimaginable wisdom. The Apocalypse is
not the end of the world, but rather it is the end of the world as we know it. The prophecy of the Apocalypse
is just one of the Bible’s beautiful messages that has been distorted.” Solomon stepped to the front of the
stage. “Believe me, the Apocalypse is coming . . . and it will be nothing like what we were taught.”
High over his head, the bell began to toll.
The students erupted into bewildered and thunderous applause.
CHAPTER 112
Katherine Solomon was teetering on the edge of consciousness when she was jolted by the shock wave of a
deafening explosion.
Moments later, she smelled smoke.
Her ears were ringing.
There were muffled voices. Distant. Shouting. Footsteps. Suddenly she was breathing more clearly. The cloth
had been pulled from her mouth.
“You’re safe,” a man’s voice whispered. “Just hold on.”
She expected the man to pull the needle out of her arm but instead he was yelling orders. “Bring the medical
kit . . . attach an IV to the needle . . . infuse lactated Ringer’s solution . . . get me a blood pressure.” As the
man began checking her vital signs, he said, “Ms. Solomon, the person who did this to you . . . where did he
go?”
Katherine tried to speak, but she could not.
“Ms. Solomon?” the voice repeated. “Where did he go?”
Katherine tried to pry her eyes open, but she felt herself fading.
“We need to know where he went,” the man urged.
Katherine whispered three words in response, although she knew they made no sense. “The . . . sacred . . .
mountain.”
Director Sato stepped over the mangled steel door and descended a wooden ramp into the hidden basement.
One of her agents met her at the bottom.
“Director, I think you’ll want to see this.”
Sato followed the agent into a small room off the narrow hallway. The room was brightly lit and barren,
except for a pile of clothing on the floor. She recognized Robert Langdon’s tweed coat and loafers.
Her agent pointed toward the far wall at a large, casketlike container.
What in the world?
Sato moved toward the container, seeing now that it was fed by a clear plastic pipe that ran through the wall.
Warily, she approached the tank.
Now she could see that it had a small slider on top. She reached down and slid the covering to one side,
revealing a small portal-like window.
Sato recoiled.
Beneath the Plexiglas . . . floated the submerged, vacant face of Professor Robert Langdon.
Light!
The endless void in which Langdon hovered was suddenly filled by a blinding sun. Rays of white-hot light
streamed across the blackness of space, burning into his mind.
The light was everywhere.
Suddenly, within the radiant cloud before him, a beautiful silhouette appeared. It was a face . . . blurry and
indistinct . . . two eyes staring at him across the void. Streams of light surrounded the face, and Langdon
wondered if he was looking into the face of God.
Sato stared down into the tank, wondering if Professor Langdon had any idea what had happened. She
doubted it. After all, disorientation was the entire purpose of this technology.
Sensory-deprivation tanks had been around since the fifties and were still a popular getaway for wealthy New
Age experimenters. “Floating,” as it was called, offered a transcendental back-to-the-womb experience . . . a
kind of meditative aid that quieted brain activity by removing all sensory input—light, sound, touch, and
even the pull of gravity. In traditional tanks, the person would float on his back in a hyperbuoyant saline
solution that kept his face above the water so he could breathe.
In recent years, however, these tanks had taken a quantum leap.
Oxygenated perfluorocarbons.
This new technology—known as Total Liquid Ventilation (TLV)—was so counterintuitive that few believed
it existed.
Breathable liquid.
Liquid breathing had been a reality since 1966, when Leland C. Clark successfully kept alive a mouse that
had been submerged for several hours in an oxygenated perfluorocarbon. In 1989, TLV technology made a
dramatic appearance in the movie The Abyss, although few viewers realized that they were watching real
science.
Total Liquid Ventilation had been born of modern medicine’s attempts to help premature babies breathe by
returning them to the liquid-filled state of the womb. Human lungs, having spent nine months in utero, were
no strangers to a liquid-filled state. Perfluorocarbons had once been too viscous to be fully breathable, but
modern breakthroughs had made breathable liquids almost the consistency of water.
The CIA’s Directorate of Science and Technology—“the Wizards of Langley,” as they were known within
the intelligence community—had worked extensively with oxygenated perfluorocarbons to develop
technologies for the U.S. military. The navy’s elite deep-ocean diving teams found that breathing oxygenated
liquid, rather than the usual heliox or trimix, gave them the ability to dive to much greater depths without risk
of pressure sickness. Similarly, NASA and the air force had learned that pilots equipped with a liquid
breathing apparatus rather than a traditional oxygen tank could withstand far higher g-forces than usual
because liquid spread the g-force more evenly throughout the internal organs than gas did.
Sato had heard that there were now “extreme experience labs” where one could try these Total Liquid
Ventilation tanks—“Meditation Machines,” as they were called. This particular tank had probably been
installed for its owner’s private experimentation, although the addition of heavy, lockable latches left little
doubt in Sato’s mind that this tank had also been used for darker applications . . . an interrogation technique
with which the CIA was familiar.
The infamous interrogation technique of water boarding was highly effective because the victim truly
believed he was drowning. Sato knew of several classified operations in which sensory-deprivation tanks like
these had been used to enhance that illusion to terrifying new levels. A victim submerged in breathable liquid
could literally be “drowned.” The panic associated with the drowning experience usually made the victim
unaware that the liquid he was breathing was slightly more viscous than water. When the liquid poured into
his lungs, he would often black out from fear, and then awaken in the ultimate “solitary confinement.”
Topical numbing agents, paralysis drugs, and hallucinogens were mixed with the warm oxygenated liquid to
give the prisoner the sense he was entirely separated from his body. When his mind sent commands to move
his limbs, nothing happened. The state of being “dead” was terrifying on its own, but the true disorientation
came from the “rebirthing” process, which, with the aid of bright lights, cold air, and deafening noise, could
be extremely traumatic and painful. After a handful of rebirths and subsequent drownings, the prisoner
became so disorientated that he had no idea if he was alive or dead . . . and he would tell the interrogator
absolutely anything.
Sato wondered if she should wait for a medical team to extract Langdon, but she knew she didn’t have time. I
need to know what he knows.
“Turn out the lights,” she said. “And find me some blankets.”
The blinding sun had vanished.
The face had also disappeared.
The blackness had returned, but Langdon could now hear distant whispers echoing across the light-years of
emptiness. Muffled voices . . . unintelligible words. There were vibrations now . . . as if the world were about
to shake apart.
Then it happened.
Without warning, the universe was ripped in two. An enormous chasm opened in the void . . . as if space
itself had ruptured at the seams. A grayish mist poured through the opening, and Langdon saw a terrifying
sight. Disembodied hands were suddenly reaching for him, grabbing his body, trying to yank him out of his
world.
No! He tried to fight them off, but he had no arms . . . no fists. Or did he? Suddenly he felt his body
materializing around his mind. His flesh had returned and it was being seized by powerful hands that were
dragging him upward. No! Please!
But it was too late.
Pain racked his chest as the hands heaved him through the opening. His lungs felt like they were filled with
sand. I can’t breathe! He was suddenly on his back on the coldest, hardest surface he could imagine.
Something was pressing on his chest, over and over, hard and painful. He was spewing out the warmth.
I want to go back.
He felt like he was a child being born from a womb.
He was convulsing, coughing up liquid. He felt pain in his chest and neck. Excruciating pain. His throat was
on fire. People were talking, trying to whisper, but it was deafening. His vision was blurred, and all he could
see was muted shapes. His skin felt numb, like dead leather.
His chest felt heavier now . . . pressure. I can’t breathe!
He was coughing up more liquid. An overwhelming gag reflex seized him, and he gasped inward. Cold air
poured into his lungs, and he felt like a newborn taking his first breath on earth. This world was excruciating.
All Langdon wanted was to return to the womb.
Robert Langdon had no idea how much time had passed. He could feel now that he was lying on his side,
wrapped in towels and blankets on a hard floor. A familiar face was gazing down at him . . . but the streams
of glorious light were gone. The echoes of distant chanting still hung in his mind.
Verbum significatium . . . Verbum omnificum . . .
“Professor Langdon,” someone whispered. “Do you know where you are?”
Langdon nodded weakly, still coughing.
More important, he had begun to realize what was going on tonight.
CHAPTER 113
Wrapped in wool blankets, Langdon stood on wobbly legs and stared down at the open tank of liquid. His
body had returned to him, although he wished it had not. His throat and lungs burned. This world felt hard
and cruel.
Sato had just explained the sensory-deprivation tank . . . adding that if she had not pulled him out, he would
have died of starvation, or worse. Langdon had little doubt that Peter had endured a similar experience. Peter
is in the in-between, the tattooed man had told him earlier tonight. He is in purgatory . . . Hamistagan. If
Peter had endured more than one of those birthing processes, Langdon would not have been surprised if Peter
had told his captor anything he had wanted to know.
Sato motioned for Langdon to follow her, and he did, trudging slowly down a narrow hall, deeper into this
bizarre lair that he was now seeing for the first time. They entered a square room with a stone table and eeriecolored
lighting. Katherine was here, and Langdon heaved a sigh of relief. Even so, the scene was
worrisome.
Katherine was lying on her back on a stone table. Blood-soaked towels lay on the floor. A CIA agent was
holding an IV bag above her, the tube connected to her arm.
She was sobbing quietly.
“Katherine?” Langdon croaked, barely able to speak.
She turned her head, looking disorientated and confused. “Robert?!” Her eyes widened with disbelief and
then joy. “But I . . . saw you drown!”
He moved toward the stone table.
Katherine pulled herself to a seated position, ignoring her IV tube and the medical objections of the agent.
Langdon reached the table, and Katherine reached out, wrapping her arms around his blanket-clad body,
holding him close. “Thank God,” she whispered, kissing his cheek. Then she kissed him again, squeezing
him as though she didn’t believe he was real. “I don’t understand . . . how . . .”
Sato began saying something about sensory-deprivation tanks and oxygenated perfluorocarbons, but
Katherine clearly wasn’t listening. She just held Langdon close.
“Robert,” she said, “Peter’s alive.” Her voice wavered as she recounted her horrifying reunion with Peter.
She described his physical condition—the wheelchair, the strange knife, the allusions to some kind of
“sacrifice,” and how she had been left bleeding as a human hourglass to persuade Peter to cooperate quickly.
Langdon could barely speak. “Do you . . . have any idea where . . . they went?!”
“He said he was taking Peter to the sacred mountain.”
Langdon pulled away and stared at her.
Katherine had tears in her eyes. “He said he had deciphered the grid on the bottom of the pyramid, and that
the pyramid told him to go to the sacred mountain.”
“Professor,” Sato pressed, “does that mean anything to you?”
Langdon shook his head. “Not at all.” Still, he felt a surge of hope. “But if he got the information off the
bottom of the pyramid, we can get it, too.” I told him how to solve it.
Sato shook her head. “The pyramid’s gone. We’ve looked. He took it with him.”
Langdon remained silent a moment, closing his eyes and trying to recall what he had seen on the base of the
pyramid. The grid of symbols had been one of the last images he had seen before drowning, and trauma had a
way of burning memories deeper into the mind. He could recall some of the grid, definitely not all of it, but
maybe enough?
He turned to Sato and said hurriedly, “I may be able to remember enough, but I need you to look up
something on the Internet.”
She pulled out her BlackBerry.
“Run a search for ‘The Order Eight Franklin Square.’ ”
Sato gave him a startled look but began typing without questions.
Langdon’s vision was still blurry, and he was only now starting to process his strange surroundings. He
realized that the stone table on which they were leaning was covered with old bloodstains, and the wall to his
right was entirely plastered with pages of text, photos, drawings, maps, and a giant web of strings
interconnecting them.
My God.
Langdon moved toward the strange collage, still clutching the blankets around his body. Tacked on the wall
was an utterly bizarre collection of information—pages from ancient texts ranging from black magic to
Christian Scripture, drawings of symbols and sigils, pages of conspiracy-theory Web sites, and satellite
photos of Washington, D.C., scrawled with notes and question marks. One of the sheets was a long list of
words in many languages. He recognized some of them as sacred Masonic words, others as ancient magic
words, and others from ceremonial incantations.
Is that what he’s looking for?
A word?
Is it that simple?
Langdon’s long-standing skepticism about the Masonic Pyramid was based largely on what it allegedly
revealed—the location of the Ancient Mysteries. This discovery would have to involve an enormous vault
filled with thousands upon thousands of volumes that had somehow survived the long-lost ancient libraries in
which they had once been stored. It all seemed impossible. A vault that big? Beneath D.C.? Now, however,
his recollection of Peter’s lecture at Phillips Exeter, combined with these lists of magic words, had opened
another startling possibility.
Langdon most definitely did not believe in the power of magic words . . . and yet it seemed pretty clear that
the tattooed man did. His pulse quickened as he again scanned the scrawled notes, the maps, the texts, the
printouts, and all the interconnected strings and sticky notes.
Sure enough, there was one recurring theme.
My God, he’s looking for the verbum significatium . . . the Lost Word. Langdon let the thought take shape,
recalling fragments of Peter’s lecture. The Lost Word is what he’s looking for! That’s what he believes is
buried here in Washington.
Sato arrived beside him. “Is this what you asked for?” She handed him her BlackBerry.
Langdon looked at the eight-by-eight grid of numbers on the screen. “Exactly.” He grabbed a piece of scrap
paper. “I’ll need a pen.”
Sato handed him one from her pocket. “Please hurry.”
Inside the basement office of the Directorate of Science and Technology, Nola Kaye was once again studying
the redacted document brought to her by sys-sec Rick Parrish. What the hell is the CIA director doing with a
file about ancient pyramids and secret underground locations?
She grabbed the phone and dialed.
Sato answered instantly, sounding tense. “Nola, I was just about to call you.”
“I have new information,” Nola said. “I’m not sure how this fits, but I’ve discovered there’s a redacted—”
“Forget it, whatever it is,” Sato interrupted. “We’re out of time. We failed to apprehend the target, and I have
every reason to believe he’s about to carry out his threat.”
Nola felt a chill.
“The good news is we know exactly where he’s going.” Sato took a deep breath. “The bad news is that he’s
carrying a laptop with him.”
CHAPTER 114
Less than ten miles away, Mal’akh tucked the blanket around Peter Solomon and wheeled him across a
moonlit parking lot into the shadow of an enormous building. The structure had exactly thirty-three outer
columns . . . each precisely thirty-three feet tall. The mountainous structure was deserted at this hour, and
nobody would ever see them back here. Not that it mattered. From a distance, no one would think twice
about a tall, kindly-looking man in a long black coat taking a bald invalid for an evening stroll.
When they reached the rear entrance, Mal’akh wheeled Peter up close to the security keypad. Peter stared at
it defiantly, clearly having no intention of entering the code.
Mal’akh laughed. “You think you’re here to let me in? Have you forgotten so soon that I am one of your
brethren?” He reached out and typed the access code that he had been given after his initiation to the thirtythird
degree.
The heavy door clicked open.
Peter groaned and began struggling in the wheelchair.
“Peter, Peter,” Mal’akh cooed. “Picture Katherine. Be cooperative, and she will live. You can save her. I give
you my word.”
Mal’akh wheeled his captive inside and relocked the door behind them, his heart racing now with
anticipation. He pushed Peter through some hallways to an elevator and pressed the call button. The doors
opened, and Mal’akh backed in, pulling the wheelchair along with him. Then, making sure Peter could see
what he was doing, he reached out and pressed the uppermost button.
A look of deepening dread crossed Peter’s tortured face.
“Shh . . .” Mal’akh whispered, gently stroking Peter’s shaved head as the elevator doors closed. “As you well
know . . . the secret is how to die.”
I can’t remember all the symbols!
Langdon closed his eyes, doing his best to recall the precise locations of the symbols on the bottom of the
stone pyramid, but even his eidetic memory did not have that degree of recall. He wrote down the few
symbols he could remember, placing each one in the location indicated by Franklin’s magic square.
So far, however, he saw nothing that made any sense.
“Look!” Katherine urged. “You must be on the right track. The first row is all Greek letters—the same kinds
of symbols are being arranged together!”
Langdon had noticed this, too, but he could not think of any Greek word that fit that configuration of letters
and spaces. I need the first letter. He glanced again at the magic square, trying to recall the letter that had
been in the number one spot near the lower left corner. Think! He closed his eyes, trying to picture the base
of the pyramid. The bottom row . . . next to the left-hand corner . . . what letter was there?
For an instant, Langdon was back in the tank, racked with terror, staring up through the Plexiglas at the
bottom of the pyramid.
Now, suddenly, he saw it. He opened his eyes, breathing heavily. “The first letter is H!”
Langdon turned back to the grid and wrote in the first letter. The word was still incomplete, but he had seen
enough. Suddenly he realized what the word might be.
?!
Pulse pounding, Langdon typed a new search into the BlackBerry. He entered the English equivalent of this
well-known Greek word. The first hit that appeared was an encyclopedia entry. He read it and knew it had to
be right.
HEREDOM n. a significant word in “high degree” Freemasonry, from French Rose Croix rituals, where it
refers to a mythical mountain in Scotland, the legendary site of the first such Chapter. From the Greek ?
originating from Hieros-domos, Greek for Holy House.
“That’s it!” Langdon exclaimed, incredulous. “That’s where they went!”
Sato had been reading over his shoulder and looked lost. “To a mythical mountain in Scotland?!”
Langdon shook his head. “No, to a building in Washington whose code name is Heredom.”
CHAPTER 115
The House of the Temple—known among its brethren as Heredom—had always been the crown jewel of the
Masonic Scottish Rite in America. With its steeply sloped, pyramidical roof, the building was named for an
imaginary Scottish mountain. Mal’akh knew, however, there was nothing imaginary about the treasure
hidden here.
This is the place, he knew. The Masonic Pyramid has shown the way.
As the old elevator slowly made its way to the third floor, Mal’akh took out the piece of paper on which he
had reorganized the grid of symbols using the Franklin Square. All the Greek letters had now shifted to the
first row . . . along with one simple symbol.
The message could not have been more clear.
Beneath the House of the Temple.
Heredom
The Lost Word is here . . . somewhere.
Although Mal’akh did not know precisely how to locate it, he was confident that the answer lay in the
remaining symbols on the grid. Conveniently, when it came to unlocking the secrets of the Masonic Pyramid
and of this building, no one was more qualified to help than Peter Solomon. The Worshipful Master himself.
Peter continued to struggle in the wheelchair, making muffled sounds through his gag.
“I know you’re worried about Katherine,” Mal’akh said. “But it’s almost over.”
For Mal’akh, the end felt like it had arrived very suddenly. After all the years of pain and planning, waiting
and searching . . . the moment had now arrived.
The elevator began to slow, and he felt a rush of excitement.
The carriage jolted to a stop.
The bronze doors slid open, and Mal’akh gazed out at the glorious chamber before them. The massive square
room was adorned with symbols and bathed in moonlight, which shone down through the oculus at the
pinnacle of the ceiling high above.
I have come full circle, Mal’akh thought.
The Temple Room was the same place in which Peter Solomon and his brethren had so foolishly initiated
Mal’akh as one of their own. Now the Masons’ most sublime secret—something that most of the brethren did
not even believe existed—was about to be unearthed.
“He won’t find anything,” Langdon said, still feeling groggy and disorientated as he followed Sato and the
others up the wooden ramp out of the basement. “There is no actual Word. It’s all a metaphor—a symbol of
the Ancient Mysteries.”
Katherine followed, with two agents assisting her weakened body up the ramp.
As the group moved gingerly through the wreckage of the steel door, through the rotating painting, and into
the living room, Langdon explained to Sato that the Lost Word was one of Freemasonry’s most enduring
symbols—a single word, written in an arcane language that man could no longer decipher. The Word, like
the Mysteries themselves, promised to unveil its hidden power only to those enlightened enough to decrypt it.
“It is said,” Langdon concluded, “that if you can possess and understand the Lost Word . . . then the Ancient
Mysteries will become clear to you.”
Sato glanced over. “So you believe this man is looking for a word?”
Langdon had to admit it sounded absurd at face value, and yet it answered a lot of questions. “Look, I’m no
specialist in ceremonial magic,” he said, “but from the documents on his basement walls . . . and from
Katherine’s description of the untattooed flesh on his head . . . I’d say he’s hoping to find the Lost Word and
inscribe it on his body.”
Sato moved the group toward the dining room. Outside, the helicopter was warming up, its blades thundering
louder and louder.
Langdon kept talking, thinking aloud. “If this guy truly believes he is about to unlock the power of the
Ancient Mysteries, no symbol would be more potent in his mind than the Lost Word. If he could find it and
inscribe it on the top of his head—a sacred location in itself—then he would no doubt consider himself
perfectly adorned and ritualistically prepared to . . .” He paused, seeing Katherine blanch at the thought of
Peter’s impending fate.
“But, Robert,” she said weakly, her voice barely audible over the helicopter blades. “This is good news,
right? If he wants to inscribe the Lost Word on the top of his head before he sacrifices Peter, then we have
time. He won’t kill Peter until he finds the Word. And, if there is no Word . . .”
Langdon tried to look hopeful as the agents helped Katherine into a chair. “Unfortunately, Peter still thinks
you’re bleeding to death. He thinks the only way to save you is to cooperate with this lunatic . . .probably to
help him find the Lost Word.”
“So what?” she insisted. “If the Word doesn’t exist—”
“Katherine,” Langdon said, staring deeply into her eyes. “If I believed you were dying, and if someone
promised me I could save you by finding the Lost Word, then I would find this man a word—any word—and
then I’d pray to God he kept his promise.”
“Director Sato!” an agent shouted from the next room. “You’d better see this!”
Sato hurried out of the dining room and saw one of her agents coming down the stairs from the bedroom. He
was carrying a blond wig. What the hell?
“Man’s hairpiece,” he said, handing it to her. “Found it in the dressing room. Have a close look.”
The blond wig was much heavier than Sato expected. The skullcap seemed to be molded of a thick gel.
Strangely, the underside of the wig had a wire protruding from it.
“Gel-pack battery that molds to your scalp,” the agent said. “Powers a fiber-optic pinpoint camera hidden in
the hair.”
“What?” Sato felt around with her fingers until she found the tiny camera lens nestled invisibly within the
blond bangs. “This thing’s a hidden camera?”
“Video camera,” the agent said. “Stores footage on this tiny solid-state card.” He pointed to a stamp-size
square of silicon embedded in the skullcap. “Probably motion activated.”
Jesus, she thought. So that’s how he did it.
This sleek version of the “flower in the lapel” secret camera had played a key role in the crisis the OS
director was facing tonight. She glared at it a moment longer and then handed it back to the agent.
“Keep searching the house,” she said. “I want every bit of information you can find on this guy. We know his
laptop is missing, and I want to know exactly how he plans to connect it to the outside world while he’s on
the move. Search his study for manuals, cables, anything at all that might give us a clue about his hardware.”
“Yes, ma’am.” The agent hurried off.
Time to move out. Sato could hear the whine of the helicopter blades at full pitch. She hurried back to the
dining room, where Simkins had now ushered Warren Bellamy in from the helicopter and was gathering intel
from him about the building to which they believed their target had gone.
House of the Temple.
“The front doors are sealed from within,” Bellamy was saying, still wrapped in a foil blanket and shivering
visibly from his time outside in Franklin Square. “The building’s rear entrance is your only way in. It’s got a
keypad with an access PIN known only to the brothers.”
“What’s the PIN?” Simkins demanded, taking notes.
Bellamy sat down, looking too feeble to stand. Through chattering teeth, he recited his access code and then
added, “The address is 1733 Sixteenth, but you’ll want the access drive and parking area, behind the
building. Kind of tricky to find, but—”
“I know exactly where it is,” Langdon said. “I’ll show you when we get there.”
Simkins shook his head. “You’re not coming, Professor. This is a military—”
“The hell I’m not!” Langdon fired back. “Peter’s in there! And that building’s a labyrinth! Without someone
to lead you in, you’ll take ten minutes to find your way up to the Temple Room!”
“He’s right,” Bellamy said. “It’s a maze. There is an elevator, but it’s old and loud and opens in full view of
the Temple Room. If you hope to move in quietly, you’ll need to ascend on foot.”
“You’ll never find your way,” Langdon warned. “From that rear entrance, you’re navigating through the Hall
of Regalia, the Hall of Honor, the middle landing, the Atrium, the Grand Stair—”
“Enough,” Sato said. “Langdon’s coming.”
CHAPTER 116
The energy was growing.
Mal’akh could feel it pulsing within him, moving up and down his body as he wheeled Peter Solomon
toward the altar. I will exit this building infinitely more powerful than when I entered. All that remained now
was to locate the final ingredient.
“Verbum significatium,” he whispered to himself. “Verbum omnificum.”
Mal’akh parked Peter’s wheelchair beside the altar and then circled around and unzipped the heavy daybag
that sat on Peter’s lap. Reaching inside, he lifted out the stone pyramid and held it up in the moonlight,
directly in front of Peter’s eyes, showing him the grid of symbols engraved on the bottom. “All these years,”
he taunted, “and you never knew how the pyramid kept her secrets.” Mal’akh set the pyramid carefully on
the corner of the altar and returned to the bag. “And this talisman,” he continued, extracting the golden
capstone, “did indeed bring order from chaos, exactly as promised.” He placed the metal capstone carefully
atop the stone pyramid, and then stepped back to give Peter a clear view. “Behold, your symbolon is
complete.”
Peter’s face contorted, and he tried in vain to speak.
“Good. I can see you have something you’d like to tell me.” Mal’akh roughly yanked out the gag.
Peter Solomon coughed and gasped for several seconds before he finally managed to speak. “Katherine . . .”
“Katherine’s time is short. If you want to save her, I suggest you do exactly as I say.” Mal’akh suspected she
was probably already dead, or if not, very close. It made no difference. She was lucky to have lived long
enough to say good-bye to her brother.
“Please,” Peter begged, his voice ragged. “Send an ambulance for her . . .”
“I will do exactly that. But first you must tell me how to access the secret staircase.”
Peter’s expression turned to one of disbelief. “What?!”
“The staircase. Masonic legend speaks of stairs that descend hundreds of feet to the secret location where the
Lost Word is buried.”
Peter now looked panicked.
“You know the legend,” Mal’akh baited. “A secret staircase hidden beneath a stone.” He pointed to the
central altar—a huge block of granite with a gilded inscription in Hebrew: GOD SAID, “LET THERE BE
LIGHT” AND THERE WAS LIGHT. “Obviously, this is the right place. The entrance to the staircase
must be hidden on one of the floors beneath us.”
“There is no secret staircase in this building!” Peter shouted.
Mal’akh smiled patiently and motioned upward. “This building is shaped like a pyramid.” He pointed to the
four-sided vaulted ceiling that angled up to the square oculus in the center.
“Yes, the House of the Temple is a pyramid, but what does—”
“Peter, I have all night.” Mal’akh smoothed his white silk robe over his perfect body. “Katherine, however,
does not. If you want her to live, you will tell me how to access the staircase.”
“I already told you,” he declared, “there is no secret staircase in this building!”
“No?” Mal’akh calmly produced the sheet of paper on which he had reorganized the grid of symbols from
the base of the pyramid. “This is the Masonic Pyramid’s final message. Your friend Robert Langdon helped
me decipher it.”
Mal’akh raised the paper and held it in front of Peter’s eyes. The Worshipful Master inhaled sharply when he
saw it. Not only had the sixty-four symbols been organized into clearly meaningful groups . . . but an actual
image had materialized out of the chaos.
An image of a staircase . . . beneath a pyramid.
Peter Solomon stared in disbelief at the grid of symbols before him. The Masonic Pyramid had kept its secret
for generations. Now, suddenly, it was being unveiled, and he felt a cold sense of foreboding in the pit of his
stomach.
The pyramid’s final code.
At a glance, the true meaning of these symbols remained a mystery to Peter, and yet he could immediately
understand why the tattooed man believed what he believed.
He thinks there is a hidden staircase beneath the pyramid called Heredom. He misunderstands these
symbols.
“Where is it?” the tattooed man demanded. “Tell me how to find the staircase, and I will save Katherine.”
I wish I could do that, Peter thought. But the staircase is not real. The myth of the staircase was purely
symbolic . . . part of the great allegories of Masonry. The Winding Staircase, as it was known, appeared on
the second-degree tracing boards. It represented man’s intellectual climb toward the Divine Truth. Like
Jacob’s ladder, the Winding Staircase was a symbol of the pathway to heaven . . . the journey of man toward
God . . . the connection between the earthly and spiritual realms. Its steps represented the many virtues of the
mind.
He should know that, Peter thought. He endured all the initiations.
Every Masonic initiate learned of the symbolic staircase that he could ascend, enabling him “to participate in
the mysteries of human science.” Freemasonry, like Noetic Science and the Ancient Mysteries, revered the
untapped potential of the human mind, and many of Masonry’s symbols related to human physiology.
The mind sits like a golden capstone atop the physical body. The Philosopher’s Stone. Through the staircase
of the spine, energy ascends and descends, circulating, connecting the heavenly mind to the physical body.
Peter knew it was no coincidence that the spine was made up of exactly thirty-three vertebrae. Thirty-three
are the degrees of Masonry. The base of the spine, or sacrum, literally meant “sacred bone.” The body is
indeed a temple. The human science that Masons revered was the ancient understanding of how to use that
temple for its most potent and noble purpose.
Unfortunately, explaining the truth to this man was not going to help Katherine at all. Peter gazed down at
the grid of symbols and gave a defeated sigh. “You’re right,” he lied. “There is indeed a secret staircase
beneath this building. And as soon as you send help to Katherine, I’ll take you to it.”
The man with the tattoos simply stared at him.
Solomon glared back, eyes defiant. “Either save my sister and learn the truth . . . or kill us both and remain
ignorant forever!”
The man quietly lowered the paper and shook his head. “I’m not happy with you, Peter. You failed your test.
You still take me for a fool. Do you truly believe I don’t understand what it is I seek? Do you think I have
not yet grasped my true potential?”
With that, the man turned his back and slipped off his robe. As the white silk fluttered to the floor, Peter saw
for the first time the long tattoo running up the man’s spine.
Dear God . . .
Winding up from the man’s white loincloth, an elegant spiral staircase ascended the middle of his muscular
back. Each stair was positioned on a different vertebra. Speechless, Peter let his eyes ascend the staircase, all
the way up to the base of the man’s skull.
Peter could only stare.
The tattooed man now tipped his shaved head backward, revealing the circle of bare flesh on the pinnacle of
his skull. The virgin skin was bordered by a single snake, looped in a circle, consuming itself.
At-one-ment.
Slowly now, the man lowered his head and turned to face Peter. The massive double-headed phoenix on his
chest stared out through dead eyes.
“I am looking for the Lost Word,” the man said. “Are you going to help me . . . or are you and your sister
going to die?”
You know how to find it, Mal’akh thought. You know something you’re not telling me.
Peter Solomon had revealed things under interrogation that he probably didn’t even recall now. The repeated
sessions in and out of the deprivation tank had left him delirious and compliant. Incredibly, when he spilled
his guts, everything he told Mal’akh had been consistent with the legend of the Lost Word.
The Lost Word is not a metaphor . . . it is real. The Word is written in an ancient language . . . and has been
hidden for ages. The Word is capable of bringing unfathomable power to anyone who grasps its true
meaning. The Word remains hidden to this day . . . and the Masonic Pyramid has the power to unveil it.
“Peter,” Mal’akh now said, staring into his captive’s eyes, “when you looked at that grid of symbols . . . you
saw something. You had a revelation. This grid means something to you. Tell me.”
“I will tell you nothing until you send help to Katherine!”
Mal’akh smiled at him. “Believe me, the prospect of losing your sister is the least of your worries right now.”
Without another word, he turned to Langdon’s daybag and started removing the items he had packed in his
basement. Then he began meticulously arranging them on the sacrificial altar.
A folded silk cloth. Pure white.
A silver censer. Egyptian myrrh.
A vial of Peter’s blood. Mixed with ash.
A black crow’s feather. His sacred stylus.
The sacrificial knife. Forged of iron from a meteorite in the desert of Canaan.
“You think I am afraid to die?” Peter shouted, his voice racked with anguish. “If Katherine is gone, I have
nothing left! You’ve murdered my entire family! You’ve taken everything from me!”
“Not everything,” Mal’akh replied. “Not yet.” He reached into the day-bag and pulled out the laptop from his
study. He turned it on and looked over at his captive. “I’m afraid you have not yet grasped the true nature of
your predicament.”
CHAPTER 117
Langdon felt his stomach drop as the CIA helicopter leaped off the lawn, banked hard, and accelerated faster
than he ever imagined a helicopter could move. Katherine had stayed behind to recuperate with Bellamy
while one of the CIA agents searched the mansion and waited for a backup team.
Before Langdon left, she had kissed him on the cheek and whispered, “Be safe, Robert.”
Now Langdon was holding on for dear life as the military helicopter finally leveled out and raced toward the
House of the Temple.
Seated beside him, Sato was yelling up to the pilot. “Head for Dupont Circle!” she shouted over the
deafening noise. “We’ll set down there!”
Startled, Langdon turned to her. “Dupont?! That’s blocks from the House of the Temple! We can land in the
Temple parking lot!”
Sato shook her head. “We need to enter the building quietly. If our target hears us coming—”
“We don’t have time!” Langdon argued. “This lunatic is about to murder Peter! Maybe the sound of the
helicopter will scare him and make him stop!”
Sato stared at him with ice-cold eyes. “As I have told you, Peter Solomon’s safety is not my primary
objective. I believe I’ve made that clear.”
Langdon was in no mood for another national-security lecture. “Look, I’m the only one on board who knows
his way through that building—”
“Careful, Professor,” the director warned. “You are here as a member of my team, and I will have your
complete cooperation.” She paused a moment and then added, “In fact, it might be wise if I now apprised you
fully of the severity of our crisis tonight.”
Sato reached under her seat and pulled out a sleek titanium briefcase, which she opened to reveal an
unusually complicated-looking computer. When she turned it on, a CIA logo materialized along with a log-in
prompt.
As Sato logged in, she asked, “Professor, do you remember the blond hairpiece we found in the man’s
home?”
“Yes.”
“Well, hidden within that wig was a tiny fiber-optic camera . . . concealed in the bangs.”
“A hidden camera? I don’t understand.”
Sato looked grim. “You will.” She launched a file on the laptop.
ONE MOMENT PLEASE . . .
DECRYPTING FILE . . .
A video window popped up, filling the entire screen. Sato lifted the briefcase and set it on Langdon’s thighs,
giving him a front-row seat.
An unusual image materialized on the screen.
Langdon recoiled in surprise. What the hell?!
Murky and dark, the video was of a blindfolded man. He was dressed in the garb of a medieval heretic being
led to the gallows—noose around his neck, left pant leg rolled up to the knee, right sleeve rolled up to the
elbow, and his shirt gaping open to reveal his bare chest.
Langdon stared in disbelief. He had read enough about Masonic rituals to recognize exactly what he was
looking at.
A Masonic initiate . . . preparing to enter the first degree.
The man was very muscular and tall, with a familiar blond hairpiece and deeply tanned skin. Langdon
recognized his features at once. The man’s tattoos had obviously been concealed beneath bronzing makeup.
He was standing before a full-length mirror videotaping his reflection through the camera concealed in his
wig.
But . . . why?
The screen faded to black.
New footage appeared. A small, dimly lit, rectangular chamber. A dramatic chessboard floor of black-andwhite
tile. A low wooden altar, flanked on three sides by pillars, atop which burned flickering candles.
Langdon felt a sudden apprehension.
Oh my God.
Filming in the erratic style of an amateur home video, the camera now panned up to the periphery of the
room to reveal a small group of men observing the initiate. The men were dressed in ritual Masonic regalia.
In the darkness, Langdon could not make out their faces, but he had no doubt where this ritual was taking
place.
The traditional layout of this Lodge Room could have been anywhere in the world, but the powder-blue
triangular pediment above the master’s chair revealed it as the oldest Masonic lodge in D.C.—Potomac
Lodge No. 5—home of George Washington and the Masonic forefathers who laid the cornerstone for the
White House and the Capitol Building.
The lodge was still active today.
Peter Solomon, in addition to overseeing the House of the Temple, was the master of his local lodge. And it
was at lodges like this one that a Masonic initiate’s journey always began . . . where he underwent the first
three degrees of Freemasonry.
“Brethren,” Peter’s familiar voice declared, “in the name of the Great Architect of the Universe, I open this
lodge for the practice of Masonry in the first degree!”
A gavel rapped loudly.
Langdon watched in utter disbelief as the video progressed through a quick series of dissolves featuring Peter
Solomon performing some of the ritual’s starker moments.
Pressing a shining dagger to the initiate’s bare chest . . . threatening impalement should the initiate
“inappropriately reveal the Mysteries of Masonry” . . . describing the black-and-white floor as representing
“the living and the dead” . . . outlining punishments that included “having one’s throat cut across, one’s
tongue torn out by its roots, and one’s body buried in the rough sands of the sea . . .”
Langdon stared. Am I really witnessing this? Masonic initiation rites had remained shrouded in secrecy for
centuries. The only descriptions that had ever been leaked were written by a handful of estranged brothers.
Langdon had read those accounts, of course, and yet to see an initiation with his own eyes . . . this was a
much different story.
Especially edited this way. Langdon could already tell that the video was an unfair piece of propaganda,
omitting all the noblest aspects of the initiation and highlighting only the most disconcerting. If this video
were released, Langdon knew it would become an Internet sensation over night. The anti-Masonic
conspiracy theorists would feed on this like sharks. The Masonic organization, and especially Peter Solomon,
would find themselves embroiled in a firestorm of controversy and a desperate effort at damage control . . .
even though the ritual was innocuous and purely symbolic.
Eerily, the video included a biblical reference to human sacrifice . . . “the submission of Abraham to the
Supreme Being by proffering Isaac, his firstborn son.” Langdon thought of Peter and willed the helicopter to
fly faster.
The video footage shifted now.
Same room. Different night. A larger group of Masons looking on. Peter Solomon was observing from the
master’s chair. This was the second degree. More intense now. Kneeling at the altar . . . vowing to “forever
conceal the enigmas existing within Freemasonry” . . . consenting to the penalty of “having one’s chest
cavity ripped open and pulsing heart cast upon the surface of the earth as offal for the ravenous beasts” . . .
Langdon’s own heart was pulsing wildly now as the video shifted yet again. Another night. A much larger
crowd. A coffin-shaped “tracing board” on the floor.
The third degree.
This was the death ritual—the most rigorous of all the degrees—the moment in which the initiate was forced
“to face the final challenge of personal extinction.” This grueling interrogation was in fact the source of the
common phrase to give someone the third degree. And although Langdon was very familiar with academic
accounts of it, he was in no way prepared for what he now saw.
The murder.
In violent, rapid intercuts, the video displayed a chilling, victim’s point-of-view account of the initiate’s
brutal murder. There were simulated blows to his head, including one with a Mason’s stone maul. All the
while, a deacon mournfully told the story of “the widow’s son”—Hiram Abiff—the master Architect of King
Solomon’s temple, who chose to die rather than reveal the secret wisdom he possessed.
The attack was mimed, of course, and yet its effect on camera was bloodcurdling. After the deathblow, the
initiate—now “dead to his former self”—was lowered into his symbolic coffin, where his eyes were shut and
his arms were crossed like those of a corpse. The Masonic brothers rose and mournfully circled his dead
body while a pipe organ played a march of the dead.
The macabre scene was deeply disturbing.
And it only got worse.
As the men gathered around their slain brother, the hidden camera clearly displayed their faces. Langdon
now realized that Solomon was not the only famous man in the room. One of the men peering down at the
initiate in his coffin was on television almost daily.
A prominent U.S. senator.
Oh God . . .
The scene changed yet again. Outside now . . . nighttime . . . the same jumpy video footage . . . the man was
walking down a city street . . . strands of blond hair blowing in front of the camera . . . turning a corner . .
.the camera angle lowering to something in the man’s hand . . . a dollar bill . . . a close-up focusing on the
Great Seal . . . the all-seeing eye . . . the unfinished pyramid . . . and then, abruptly, pulling away to reveal a
similar shape in the distance . . . a massive pyramidical building . . . with sloping sides rising to a truncated
top.
The House of the Temple.
A soul-deep dread swelled within him.
The video kept moving . . . the man hurrying toward the building now . . . up the multitiered staircase . . .
toward the giant bronze doors . . . between the two seventeen-ton sphinx guardians.
A neophyte entering the pyramid of initiation.
Darkness now.
A powerful pipe organ played in the distance . . . and a new image materialized.
The Temple Room.
Langdon swallowed hard.
On-screen, the cavernous space was alive with electricity. Beneath the oculus, the black marble altar shone in
the moonlight. Assembled around it, seated on hand-tooled pigskin chairs, awaited a somber council of
distinguished thirty-third-degree Masons, present to bear witness. The video now panned across their faces
with slow and deliberate intention.
Langdon stared in horror.
Although he had not seen this coming, what he was looking at made perfect sense. A gathering of the most
decorated and accomplished Masons in the most powerful city on earth would logically include many
influential and well-known individuals. Sure enough, seated around the altar, adorned in their long silk
gloves, Masonic aprons, and glistening jewels, were some of the country’s most powerful men.
Two Supreme Court justices . . .
The secretary of defense . . .
The speaker of the House . . .
Langdon felt ill as the video continued panning across the faces of those in attendance.
Three prominent senators . . . including the majority leader . . .
The secretary of homeland security . . .
And . . .
The director of the CIA . . .
Langdon wanted only to look away, but he could not. The scene was utterly mesmerizing, alarming even to
him. In an instant, he had come to understand the source of Sato’s anxiety and concern.
Now, on-screen, the shot dissolved into a single shocking image.
A human skull . . . filled with dark crimson liquid. The famed caput mortuum was being offered forth to the
initiate by the slender hands of Peter Solomon, whose gold Masonic ring glinted in the candlelight. The red
liquid was wine . . . and yet it shimmered like blood. The visual effect was frightful.
The Fifth Libation, Langdon realized, having read firsthand accounts of this sacrament in John Quincy
Adams’s Letters on the Masonic Institution. Even so, to see it happen . . . to see it calmly witnessed by
America’s most powerful men . . . this was as arresting an image as any Langdon had ever seen.
The initiate took the skull in his hands . . . his face reflected in the calm surface of the wine. “May this wine I
now drink become a deadly poison to me,” he declared, “should I ever knowingly or willfully violate my
oath.”
Obviously, this initiate had intended to violate his oath beyond all imagination.
Langdon could barely get his mind around what would happen if this video were made public. No one would
understand. The government would be thrown into upheaval. The airwaves would be filled with the voices of
anti-Masonic groups, fundamentalists, and conspiracy theorists spewing hatred and fear, launching a Puritan
witch hunt all over again.
The truth will be twisted, Langdon knew. As it always is with the Masons.
The truth was that the brotherhood’s focus on death was in fact a bold celebration of life. Masonic ritual was
designed to awaken the slumbering man inside, lifting him from his dark coffin of ignorance, raising him into
the light, and giving him eyes to see. Only through the death experience could man fully understand his life
experience. Only through the realization that his days on earth were finite could he grasp the importance of
living those days with honor, integrity, and service to his fellow man.
Masonic initiations were startling because they were meant to be transformative. Masonic vows were
unforgiving because they were meant to be reminders that man’s honor and his “word” were all he could take
from this world. Masonic teachings were arcane because they were meant to be universal . . . taught through
a common language of symbols and metaphors that transcended religions, cultures, and races . . . creating a
unified “worldwide consciousness” of brotherly love.
For a brief instant, Langdon felt a glimmer of hope. He tried to assure himself that if this video were to leak
out, the public would be open-minded and tolerant, realizing that all spiritual rituals included aspects that
would seem frightening if taken out of context—crucifixion reenactments, Jewish circumcision rites,
Mormon baptisms of the dead, Catholic exorcisms, Islamic niqab, shamanic trance healing, the Jewish
Kaparot ceremony, even the eating of the figurative body and blood of Christ.
I’m dreaming, Langdon knew. This video will create chaos. He could imagine what would happen if the
prominent leaders of Russia or the Islamic world were seen in a video, pressing knives to bare chests,
swearing violent oaths, performing mock murders, lying in symbolic coffins, and drinking wine from a
human skull. The global outcry would be instantaneous and overwhelming.
God help us . . .
On-screen now, the initiate was raising the skull to his lips. He tipped it backward . . . draining the blood-red
wine . . . sealing his oath. Then he lowered the skull and gazed out at the assembly around him. America’s
most powerful and trusted men gave contented nods of acceptance.
“Welcome, brother,” Peter Solomon said.
As the image faded to black, Langdon realized he had stopped breathing.
Without a word, Sato reached over, closed the briefcase, and lifted it off his lap. Langdon turned to her trying
to speak, but he could find no words. It didn’t matter. Understanding was written all over his face. Sato was
right. Tonight was a national-security crisis . . . of unimaginable proportions.
CHAPTER 118
Dressed in his loincloth, Mal’akh padded back and forth in front of Peter Solomon’s wheelchair. “Peter,” he
whispered, enjoying every moment of his captive’s horror, “you forgot you have a second family . . . your
Masonic brothers. And I will destroy them, too . . . unless you help me.”
Solomon looked almost catatonic in the glow of the laptop sitting atop his thighs. “Please,” he finally
stammered, glancing up. “If this video gets out . . .”
“If?” Mal’akh laughed. “If it gets out?” He motioned to the small cellular modem plugged into the side of his
laptop. “I’m connected to the world.”
“You wouldn’t . . .”
I will, Mal’akh thought, enjoying Solomon’s horror. “You have the power to stop me,” he said. “And to save
your sister. But you have to tell me what I want to know. The Lost Word is hidden somewhere, Peter, and I
know this grid reveals exactly where to find it.”
Peter glanced at the grid of symbols again, his eyes revealing nothing.
“Perhaps this will help to inspire you.” Mal’akh reached over Peter’s shoulders and hit a few keys on the
laptop. An e-mail program launched on the screen, and Peter stiffened visibly. The screen now displayed an
e-mail that Mal’akh had cued earlier tonight—a video file addressed to a long list of major media networks.
Mal’akh smiled. “I think it’s time we share, don’t you?”
“Don’t!”
Mal’akh reached down and clicked the send button on the program. Peter jerked against his bonds, trying
unsuccessfully to knock the laptop to the floor.
“Relax, Peter,” Mal’akh whispered. “It’s a massive file. It will take a few minutes to go out.” He pointed to
the progress bar:
SENDING MESSAGE: 2% COMPLETE
“If you tell me what I want to know, I’ll stop the e-mail, and nobody will ever see this.”
Peter was ashen as the task bar inched forward.
SENDING MESSAGE: 4% COMPLETE
Mal’akh now lifted the computer from Peter’s lap and set it on one of the nearby pigskin chairs, turning the
screen so the other man could watch the progress. Then he returned to Peter’s side and laid the page of
symbols in his lap. “The legends say the Masonic Pyramid will unveil the Lost Word. This is the pyramid’s
final code. I believe you know how to read it.”
Mal’akh glanced over at the laptop.
SENDING MESSAGE: 8% COMPLETE
Mal’akh returned his eyes to Peter. Solomon was staring at him, his gray eyes blazing now with hatred.
Hate me, Mal’akh thought. The greater the emotion, the more potent the energy that will be released when
the ritual is completed.
At Langley, Nola Kaye pressed the phone to her ear, barely able to hear Sato over the noise of the helicopter.
“They said it’s impossible to stop the file transfer!” Nola shouted. “To shut down local ISPs would take at
least an hour, and if he’s got access to a wireless provider, killing the ground-based Internet won’t stop him
from sending it anyway.”
Nowadays, stopping the flow of digital information had become nearly impossible. There were too many
access routes to the Internet. Between hard lines, Wi-Fi hot spots, cellular modems, SAT phones,
superphones, and e-mail-equipped PDAs, the only way to isolate a potential data leak was by destroying the
source machine.
“I pulled the spec sheet on the UH-60 you’re flying,” Nola said, “and it looks like you’re equipped with
EMP.”
Electromagnetic-pulse or EMP guns were now commonplace among law enforcement agencies, which used
them primarily to stop car chases from a safe distance. By firing a highly concentrated pulse of
electromagnetic radiation, an EMP gun could effectively fry the electronics of any device it targeted—cars,
cell phones, computers. According to Nola’s spec sheet, the UH-60 had a chassis-mounted, laser-sighted, sixgigahertz
magnetron with a fifty-dB-gain horn that yielded a ten-gigawatt pulse. Discharged directly at a
laptop, the pulse would fry the computer’s motherboard and instantly erase the hard drive.
“EMP will be useless,” Sato yelled back. “Target is inside a stone building. No sight lines and thick EM
shielding. Do you have any indication yet if the video has gone out?”
Nola glanced at a second monitor, which was running a continuous search for breaking news stories about
the Masons. “Not yet, ma’am. But if it goes public, we’ll know within seconds.”
“Keep me posted.” Sato signed off.
Langdon held his breath as the helicopter dropped from the sky toward Dupont Circle. A handful of
pedestrians scattered as the aircraft descended through an opening in the trees and landed hard on the lawn
just south of the famous two-tiered fountain designed by the same two men who created the Lincoln
Memorial.
Thirty seconds later, Langdon was riding shotgun in a commandeered Lexus SUV, tearing up New
Hampshire Avenue toward the House of the Temple.
Peter Solomon was desperately trying to figure out what to do. All he could see in his mind were the images
of Katherine bleeding in the basement . . . and of the video he had just witnessed. He turned his head slowly
toward the laptop on the pigskin chair several yards away. The progress bar was almost a third of the way
filled.
SENDING MESSAGE: 29% COMPLETE
The tattooed man was now walking slow circles around the square altar, swinging a lit censer and chanting to
himself. Thick puffs of white smoke swirled up toward the skylight. The man’s eyes were wide now, and he
seemed to be in a demonic trance. Peter turned his gaze to the ancient knife that sat waiting on the white silk
cloth spread across the altar.
Peter Solomon had no doubt that he would die in this temple tonight. The question was how to die. Would he
find a way to save his sister and his brotherhood . . . or would his death be entirely in vain?
He glanced down at the grid of symbols. When he had first laid eyes on the grid, the shock of the moment
had blinded him . . . preventing his vision from piercing the veil of chaos . . . to glimpse the startling truth.
Now, however, the real significance of these symbols had become crystal clear to him. He had seen the grid
in an entirely new light.
Peter Solomon knew exactly what he needed to do.
Taking a deep breath, he gazed up at the moon through the oculus above. Then he began to speak.
All great truths are simple.
Mal’akh had learned that long ago.
The solution that Peter Solomon was now explaining was so graceful and pure that Mal’akh was sure that it
could only be true. Incredibly, the solution to the pyramid’s final code was far simpler than he had ever
imagined.
The Lost Word was right before my eyes.
In an instant, a bright ray of light pierced the murkiness of the history and myth surrounding the Lost Word.
As promised, the Lost Word was indeed written in an ancient language and bore mystical power in every
philosophy, religion, and science ever known to man. Alchemy, astrology, Kabbalah, Christianity, Buddhism,
Rosicrucianism, Freemasonry, astronomy, physics, Noetics . . .
Standing now in this initiation chamber atop the great pyramid of Heredom, Mal’akh gazed upon the treasure
he had sought all these years, and he knew he could not have prepared himself more perfectly.
Soon I am complete.
The Lost Word is found.
In Kalorama Heights, a lone CIA agent stood amid a sea of garbage that he had dumped out of the trash bins
that had been found in the garage.
“Ms. Kaye?” he said, speaking to Sato’s analyst on the phone. “Good thinking to search his garbage. I think I
just found something.”
Inside the house, Katherine Solomon was feeling stronger with every passing moment. The infusion of
lactated Ringer’s solution had successfully raised her blood pressure and quelled her throbbing headache.
She was resting now, seated in the dining room, with explicit instructions to remain still. Her nerves felt
frayed, and she was increasingly anxious for news about her brother.
Where is everybody? The CIA’s forensics team had not yet arrived, and the agent who had stayed behind was
still off searching the premises. Bellamy had been sitting with her in the dining room, still wrapped in a foil
blanket, but he, too, had wandered off to look for any information that might help the CIA save Peter.
Unable to sit idly, Katherine pulled herself to her feet, teetered, and then inched slowly toward the living
room. She found Bellamy in the study. The Architect was standing at an open drawer, his back to her,
apparently too engrossed in its contents to hear her enter.
She walked up behind him. “Warren?”
The old man lurched and turned, quickly shutting the drawer with his hip. His face was lined with shock and
grief, his cheeks streaked with tears.
“What’s wrong?!” She glanced down at the drawer. “What is it?”
Bellamy seemed unable to speak. He had the look of a man who had just seen something he deeply wished
he had not.
“What’s in the drawer?” she demanded.
Bellamy’s tear-filled eyes held hers for a long, sorrowful moment. Finally he spoke. “You and I wondered
why . . . why this man seemed to hate your family.”
Katherine’s brow furrowed. “Yes?”
“Well . . .” Bellamy’s voice caught. “I just found the answer.”
CHAPTER 119
In the chamber at the top of the House of the Temple, the one who called himself Mal’akh stood before the
great altar and gently massaged the virgin skin atop his head. Verbum significatium, he chanted in
preparation. Verbum omnificum. The final ingredient had been found at last.
The most precious treasures are often the simplest.
Above the altar, wisps of fragrant smoke now swirled, billowing up from the censer. The suffumigations
ascended through the shaft of moonlight, clearing a channel skyward through which a liberated soul could
travel freely.
The time had come.
Mal’akh retrieved the vial of Peter’s darkened blood and uncorked it. With his captive looking on, he dipped
the nib of the crow’s feather into the crimson tincture and raised it to the sacred circle of flesh atop his head.
He paused a moment . . . thinking of how long he had waited for this night. His great transformation was
finally at hand. When the Lost Word is written on the mind of man, he is then ready to receive unimaginable
power. Such was the ancient promise of apotheosis. So far, mankind had been unable to realize that promise,
and Mal’akh had done what he could to keep it that way.
With a steady hand, Mal’akh touched the nib of the feather to his skin. He needed no mirror, no assistance,
only his sense of touch, and his mind’s eye. Slowly, meticulously, he began inscribing the Lost Word inside
the circular ouroboros on his scalp.
Peter Solomon looked on with an expression of horror.
When Mal’akh finished, he closed his eyes, set down the feather, and let the air out of his lungs entirely. For
the first time in his life, he felt a sensation he had never known.
I am complete.
I am at one.
Mal’akh had worked for years on the artifact that was his body, and now, as he neared his moment of final
transformation, he could feel every line that had ever been inscribed on his flesh. I am a true masterpiece.
Perfect and complete.
“I gave you what you asked for.” Peter’s voice intruded. “Send help to Katherine. And stop that file.”
Mal’akh opened his eyes and smiled. “You and I are not quite finished.” He turned to the altar and picked up
the sacrificial knife, running his finger across the sleek iron blade. “This ancient knife was commissioned by
God,” he said, “for use in a human sacrifice. You recognized it earlier, no?”
Solomon’s gray eyes were like stone. “It is unique, and I’ve heard the legend.”
“Legend? The account appears in Holy Scripture. You don’t believe it’s true?”
Peter just stared.
Mal’akh had spent a fortune locating and obtaining this artifact. Known as the Akedah knife, it had been
crafted over three thousand years ago from an iron meteorite that had fallen to earth. Iron from heaven, as the
early mystics called it. It was believed to be the exact knife used by Abraham at the Akedah—the near
sacrifice of his son Isaac on Mount Moriah—as depicted in Genesis. The knife’s astounding history included
possession by popes, Nazi mystics, European alchemists, and private collectors.
They protected and admired it, Mal’akh thought, but none dared unleash its true power by using it for its
real purpose. Tonight, the Akedah knife would fulfill its destiny.
The Akedah had always been sacred in Masonic ritual. In the very first degree, Masons celebrated “the most
august gift ever offered to God . . . the submission of Abraham to the volitions of the supreme being by
proffering Isaac, his firstborn . . .”
The weight of the blade felt exhilarating in Mal’akh’s hand as he crouched down and used the freshly
sharpened knife to sever the ropes binding Peter to his wheelchair. The bonds fell to the floor.
Peter Solomon winced in pain as he attempted to shift his cramped limbs. “Why are you doing this to me?
What do you think this will accomplish?”
“You of all people should understand,” Mal’akh replied. “You study the ancient ways. You know that the
power of the mysteries relies on sacrifice . . . on releasing a human soul from its body. It has been this way
since the beginning.”
“You know nothing of sacrifice,” Peter said, his voice seething with pain and loathing.
Excellent, Mal’akh thought. Feed your hatred. It will only make this easier.
Mal’akh’s empty stomach growled as he paced before his captive. “There is enormous power in the shedding
of human blood. Everyone understood that, from the early Egyptians, to the Celtic Druids, to the Chinese, to
the Aztecs. There is magic in human sacrifice, but modern man has become weak, too fearful to make true
offerings, too frail to give the life that is required for spiritual transformation. The ancient texts are clear,
though. Only by offering what is most sacred can man access the ultimate power.”
“You consider me a sacred offering?”
Mal’akh now laughed out loud. “You really don’t understand yet, do you?”
Peter gave him an odd look.
“Do you know why I have a deprivation tank in my home?” Mal’akh placed his hands on his hips and flexed
his elaborately decorated body, which was still covered only by a loincloth. “I have been practicing . . .
preparing . . . anticipating the moment when I am only mind . . . when I am released from this mortal shell . .
. when I have offered up this beautiful body to the gods in sacrifice. I am the precious one! I am the pure
white lamb!”
Peter’s mouth fell open but no words came out.
“Yes, Peter, a man must offer to the gods that which he holds most dear. His purest white dove . . . his most
precious and worthy offering. You are not precious to me. You are not a worthy offering.” Mal’akh glared at
him. “Don’t you see? You are not the sacrifice, Peter . . . I am. Mine is the flesh that is the offering. I am the
gift. Look at me. I have prepared, made myself worthy for my final journey. I am the gift!”
Peter remained speechless.
“The secret is how to die,” Mal’akh now said. “Masons understand that.” He pointed to the altar. “You revere
the ancient truths, and yet you are cowards. You understand the power of sacrifice and yet you keep a safe
distance from death, performing your mock murders and bloodless death rituals. Tonight, your symbolic altar
will bear witness to its true power . . . and its actual purpose.”
Mal’akh reached down and grasped Peter Solomon’s left hand, pressing the handle of the Akedah knife into
his palm. The left hand serves the darkness. This, too, had been planned. Peter would have no choice in the
matter. Mal’akh could fathom no sacrifice more potent and symbolic than one performed on this altar, by this
man, with this knife, plunged into the heart of an offering whose mortal flesh was wrapped like a gift in a
shroud of mystical symbols.
With this offering of self, Mal’akh would establish his rank in the hierarchy of demons. Darkness and blood
were where the true power lay. The ancients knew this, the Adepts choosing sides consistent with their
individual natures. Mal’akh had chosen sides wisely. Chaos was the natural law of the universe. Indifference
was the engine of entropy. Man’s apathy was the fertile ground in which the dark spirits tended their seeds.
I have served them, and they will receive me as a god.
Peter did not move. He simply stared down at the ancient knife gripped in his hand.
“I will you,” Mal’akh taunted. “I am a willing sacrifice. Your final role has been written. You will transform
me. You will liberate me from my body. You will do this, or you will lose your sister and your brotherhood.
You will truly be all alone.” He paused, smiling down at his captive. “Consider this your final punishment.”
Peter’s eyes rose slowly to meet Mal’akh’s. “Killing you? A punishment? Do you think I will hesitate? You
murdered my son. My mother. My entire family.”
“No!” Mal’akh exploded with a force that startled even himself. “You are wrong! I did not murder your
family! You did! It was you who made the choice to leave Zachary in prison! And from there, the wheels
were in motion! You killed your family, Peter, not me!”
Peter’s knuckles turned white, his fingers clenching the knife in rage. “You know nothing of why I left
Zachary in prison.”
“I know everything!” Mal’akh fired back. “I was there. You claimed you were trying to help him. Were you
trying to help him when you offered him the choice between wealth or wisdom? Were you trying to help him
when you gave him the ultimatum to join the Masons? What kind of father gives a child the choice between
‘wealth or wisdom’ and expects him to know how to handle it! What kind of father leaves his own son in a
prison instead of flying him home to safety!” Mal’akh now moved in front of Peter and crouched down,
placing his tattooed face only inches from his face. “But most important . . . what kind of father can look his
own son in the eyes . . . even after all these years . . . and not even recognize him!”
Mal’akh’s words echoed for several seconds in the stone chamber.
Then silence.
In the abrupt stillness, Peter Solomon seemed to have been jolted from his trance. His face clouded now with
a visage of total incredulity.
Yes, Father. It’s me. Mal’akh had waited years for this moment . . . to take revenge on the man who had
abandoned him . . . to stare into those gray eyes and speak the truth that had been buried all these years. Now
the moment was here, and he spoke slowly, longing to watch the full weight of his words gradually crush
Peter Solomon’s soul. “You should be happy, Father. Your prodigal son has returned.”
Peter’s face was now as pale as death.
Mal’akh savored every moment. “My own father made the decision to leave me in prison . . . and in that
instant, I vowed that he had rejected me for the last time. I was no longer his son. Zachary Solomon ceased to
exist.”
Two glistening teardrops welled suddenly in his father’s eyes, and Mal’akh thought they were the most
beautiful thing he had ever seen.
Peter choked back tears, staring up at Mal’akh’s face as if seeing him for the very first time.
“All the warden wanted was money,” Mal’akh said, “but you refused. It never occurred to you, though, that
my money was just as green as yours. The warden did not care who paid him, only that he was paid. When I
offered to pay him handsomely, he selected a sickly inmate about my size, dressed him in my clothes, and
beat him beyond all recognition. The photos you saw . . . and the sealed casket you buried . . . they were not
mine. They belonged to a stranger.”
Peter’s tear-streaked face contorted now with anguish and disbelief. “Oh my God . . . Zachary.”
“Not anymore. When Zachary walked out of prison, he was transformed.”
His adolescent physique and childlike face had drastically mutated when he flooded his young body with
experimental growth hormones and steroids. Even his vocal cords had been ravaged, transforming his boyish
voice into a permanent whisper.
Zachary became Andros.
Andros became Mal’akh.
And tonight . . . Mal’akh will become his greatest incarnation of all.
At that moment in Kalorama Heights, Katherine Solomon stood over the open desk drawer and gazed down
at what could be described only as a fetishist’s collection of old newspaper articles and photographs.
“I don’t understand,” she said, turning to Bellamy. “This lunatic was obviously obsessed with my family,
but—”
“Keep going . . .” urged Bellamy, taking a seat and still looking deeply shaken.
Katherine dug deeper into the newspaper articles, every one of which related to the Solomon family—Peter’s
many successes, Katherine’s research, their mother Isabel’s terrible murder, Zachary Solomon’s widely
publicized drug use, incarceration, and brutal murder in a Turkish prison.
The fixation this man had on the Solomon family was beyond fanatical, and yet Katherine saw nothing yet to
suggest why.
It was then that she saw the photographs. The first showed Zachary standing knee-deep in azure water on a
beach dotted with whitewashed houses. Greece? The photo, she assumed, could have been taken only during
Zach’s freewheeling drug days in Europe. Strangely, though, Zach looked healthier than he did in the
paparazzi shots of an emaciated kid partying with the drug crowd. He looked more fit, stronger somehow,
more mature. Katherine never recalled him looking so healthy.
Puzzled, she checked the date stamp on the photo.
But that’s . . . impossible.
The date was almost a full year after Zachary had died in prison.
Suddenly Katherine was flipping desperately through the stack. All of the photos were of Zachary Solomon .
. . gradually getting older. The collection appeared to be some kind of pictorial autobiography, chronicling a
slow transformation. As the pictures progressed, Katherine saw a sudden and dramatic change. She looked on
in horror as Zachary’s body began mutating, his muscles bulging, and his facial features morphing from the
obvious heavy use of steroids. His frame seemed to double in mass, and a haunting fierceness crept into his
eyes.
I don’t even recognize this man!
He looked nothing like Katherine’s memories of her young nephew.
When she reached a picture of him with a shaved head, she felt her knees begin to buckle. Then she saw a
photo of his bare body . . . adorned with the first traces of tattoos.
Her heart almost stopped. “Oh my God . . .”
CHAPTER 120
“Right turn!” Langdon shouted from the backseat of the commandeered Lexus SUV.
Simkins swerved onto S Street and gunned the vehicle through a tree-lined residential neighborhood. As they
neared the corner of Sixteenth Street, the House of the Temple rose like a mountain on the right.
Simkins stared up at the massive structure. It looked like someone had built a pyramid on top of Rome’s
Pantheon. He prepared to turn right on Sixteenth toward the front of the building.
“Don’t turn!” Langdon ordered. “Go straight! Stay on S!”
Simkins obeyed, driving alongside the east side of the building.
“At Fifteenth,” Langdon said, “turn right!”
Simkins followed his navigator, and moments later, Langdon had pointed out a nearly invisible, unpaved
access road that bisected the gardens behind the House of the Temple. Simkins turned in to the drive and
gunned the Lexus toward the rear of the building.
“Look!” Langdon said, pointing to the lone vehicle parked near the rear entrance. It was a large van.
“They’re here.”
Simkins parked the SUV and killed the engine. Quietly, everyone got out and prepared to move in. Simkins
stared up at the monolithic structure. “You say the Temple Room is at the top?”
Langdon nodded, pointing all the way to the pinnacle of the building. “That flat area on top of the pyramid is
actually a skylight.”
Simkins spun back to Langdon. “The Temple Room has a skylight?”
Langdon gave him an odd look. “Of course. An oculus to heaven . . . directly above the altar.”
The UH-60 sat idling at Dupont Circle.
In the passenger seat, Sato gnawed at her fingernails, awaiting news from her team.
Finally, Simkins’s voice crackled over the radio. “Director?”
“Sato here,” she barked.
“We’re entering the building, but I have some additional recon for you.”
“Go ahead.”
“Mr. Langdon just informed me that the room in which the target is most likely located has a very large
skylight.”
Sato considered the information for several seconds. “Understood. Thank you.”
Simkins signed off.
Sato spit out a fingernail and turned to the pilot. “Take her up.”
CHAPTER 121
Like any parent who had lost a child, Peter Solomon had often imagined how old his boy would be now . . .
what he would look like . . . and what he would have become.
Peter Solomon now had his answers.
The massive tattooed creature before him had begun life as a tiny, precious infant . . . baby Zach curled up in
a wicker bassinette . . . taking his first fumbling steps across Peter’s study . . . learning to speak his first
words. The fact that evil could spring from an innocent child in a loving family remained one of the
paradoxes of the human soul. Peter had been forced to accept early on that although his own blood flowed in
his son’s veins, the heart pumping that blood was his son’s own. Unique and singular . . . as if randomly
chosen from the universe.
My son . . . he killed my mother, my friend Robert Langdon, and possibly my sister.
An icy numbness flooded Peter’s heart as he searched his son’s eyes for any connection . . . anything
familiar. The man’s eyes, however, although gray like Peter’s, were those of a total stranger, filled with a
hatred and a vengefulness that were almost otherworldly.
“Are you strong enough?” his son taunted, glancing at the Akedah knife gripped in Peter’s hand. “Can you
finish what you started all those years ago?”
“Son . . .” Solomon barely recognized his own voice. “I . . . I loved . . . you.”
“Twice you tried to kill me. You abandoned me in prison. You shot me on Zach’s bridge. Now finish it!”
For an instant, Solomon felt like he was floating outside his own body. He no longer recognized himself. He
was missing a hand, was totally bald, dressed in a black robe, sitting in a wheelchair, and clutching an
ancient knife.
“Finish it!” the man shouted again, the tattoos on his naked chest rippling. “Killing me is the only way you
can save Katherine . . . the only way to save your brotherhood!”
Solomon felt his gaze move to the laptop and cellular modem on the pigskin chair.
SENDING MESSAGE: 92% COMPLETE
His mind could not shake the images of Katherine bleeding to death . . . or of his Masonic brothers.
“There is still time,” the man whispered. “You know it’s the only choice. Release me from my mortal shell.”
“Please,” Solomon said. “Don’t do this . . .”
“You did this!” the man hissed. “You forced your child to make an impossible choice! Do you remember that
night? Wealth or wisdom? That was the night you pushed me away forever. But I’ve returned, Father . . . and
tonight it is your turn to choose. Zachary or Katherine? Which will it be? Will you kill your son to save your
sister? Will you kill your son to save your brotherhood? Your country? Or will you wait until it’s too late?
Until Katherine is dead . . . until the video is public . . . until you must live the rest of your life knowing you
could have stopped these tragedies. Time is running out. You know what must be done.”
Peter’s heart ached. You are not Zachary, he told himself. Zachary died long, long ago. Whatever you are . . .
and wherever you came from . . . you are not of me. And although Peter Solomon did not believe his own
words, he knew he had to make a choice.
He was out of time.
Find the Grand Staircase!
Robert Langdon dashed through darkened hallways, winding his way toward the center of the building.
Turner Simkins remained close on his heels. As Langdon had hoped, he burst out into the building’s main
atrium.
Dominated by eight Doric columns of green granite, the atrium looked like a hybrid sepulcher—Greco-
Roman-Egyptian—with black marble statues, chandelier fire bowls, Teutonic crosses, double-headed
phoenix medallions, and sconces bearing the head of Hermes.
Langdon turned and ran toward the sweeping marble staircase at the far end of the atrium. “This leads
directly to the Temple Room,” he whispered as the two men ascended as quickly and quietly as possible.
On the first landing, Langdon came face-to-face with a bronze bust of Masonic luminary Albert Pike, along
with the engraving of his most famous quote: WHAT WE HAVE DONE FOR OURSELVES ALONE
DIES WITH US; WHAT WE HAVE DONE FOR OTHERS AND THE WORLD REMAINS AND IS
IMMORTAL.
Mal’akh had sensed a palpable shift in the atmosphere of the Temple Room, as if all the frustration and pain
Peter Solomon had ever felt was now boiling to the surface . . . focusing itself like a laser on Mal’akh.
Yes . . . it is time.
Peter Solomon had risen from his wheelchair and was standing now, facing the altar, gripping the knife.
“Save Katherine,” Mal’akh coaxed, luring him toward the altar, backing up, and finally laying his own body
down on the white shroud he had prepared. “Do what you need to do.”
As if moving through a nightmare, Peter inched forward.
Mal’akh reclined fully now onto his back, gazing up through the oculus at the wintry moon. The secret is
how to die. This moment could not be any more perfect. Adorned with the Lost Word of the ages, I offer
myself by the left hand of my father.
Mal’akh drew a deep breath.
Receive me, demons, for this is my body, which is offered for you.
Standing over Mal’akh, Peter Solomon was trembling. His tear-soaked eyes shone with desperation,
indecision, anguish. He looked one last time toward the modem and laptop across the room.
“Make the choice,” Mal’akh whispered. “Release me from my flesh. God wants this. You want this.” He laid
his arms at his side and arched his chest forward, offering up his magnificent double-headed phoenix. Help
me shed the body that clothes my soul.
Peter’s tearful eyes seemed to be staring through Mal’akh now, not even seeing him.
“I killed your mother!” Mal’akh whispered. “I killed Robert Langdon! I’m murdering your sister! I’m
destroying your brotherhood! Do what you have to do!”
Peter Solomon’s visage now contorted into a mask of absolute grief and regret. He threw his head back and
screamed in anguish as he raised the knife.
Robert Langdon and Agent Simkins arrived breathless outside the Temple Room doors as a bloodcurdling
scream erupted from within. It was Peter’s voice. Langdon was certain.
Peter’s cry was one of absolute agony.
I’m too late!
Ignoring Simkins, Langdon seized the handles and yanked open the doors. The horrific scene before him
confirmed his worst fears. There, in the center of the dimly lit chamber, the silhouette of a man with a shaved
head stood at the great altar. He wore a black robe, and his hand was clutching a large blade.
Before Langdon could move, the man was driving the knife down toward the body that lay outstretched on
the altar.
Mal’akh had closed his eyes.
So beautiful. So perfect.
The ancient blade of the Akedah knife had glinted in the moonlight as it arched over him. Scented wisps of
smoke had spiraled upward above him, preparing a pathway for his soon-to-be-liberated soul. His killer’s
lone scream of torment and desperation still rang through the sacred space as the knife came down.
I am besmeared with the blood of human sacrifice and parents’ tears.
Mal’akh braced for the glorious impact.
His moment of transformation had arrived.
Incredibly, he felt no pain.
A thunderous vibration filled his body, deafening and deep. The room began shaking, and a brilliant white
light blinded him from above. The heavens roared.
And Mal’akh knew it had happened.
Exactly as he had planned.
Langdon did not remember sprinting toward the altar as the helicopter appeared overhead. Nor did he
remember leaping with his arms out-stretched . . . soaring toward the man in the black robe . . . trying
desperately to tackle him before he could plunge the knife down a second time.
Their bodies collided, and Langdon saw a bright light sweep down through the oculus and illuminate the
altar. He expected to see the bloody body of Peter Solomon on the altar, but the naked chest that shone in the
light had no blood on it at all . . . only a tapestry of tattoos. The knife lay broken beside him, apparently
having been driven into the stone altar rather than into flesh.
As he and the man in the black robe crashed together onto the hard stone floor, Langdon saw the bandaged
nub on the end of the man’s right arm, and he realized to his bewilderment that he had just tackled Peter
Solomon.
As they slid together across the stone floor, the helicopter’s searchlights blazed down from above. The
chopper thundered in low, its skids practically touching the expansive wall of glass.
On the front of the helicopter, a strange-looking gun rotated, aiming downward through the glass. The red
beam of its laser scope sliced through the skylight and danced across the floor, directly toward Langdon and
Solomon.
No!
But there was no gunfire from above . . . only the sound of the helicopter blades.
Langdon felt nothing but an eerie ripple of energy that shimmered through his cells. Behind his head, on the
pigskin chair, the laptop hissed strangely. He spun in time to see its screen suddenly flash to black.
Unfortunately, the last visible message had been clear.
SENDING MESSAGE: 100% COMPLETE
Pull up! Damn it! Up!
The UH-60 pilot threw his rotors into overdrive, trying to keep his skids from touching any part of the large
glass skylight. He knew the six thousand pounds of lift force that surged downward from his rotors was
already straining the glass to its breaking point. Unfortunately, the incline of the pyramid beneath the
helicopter was efficiently shedding the thrust sideways, robbing him of lift.
Up! Now!
He tipped the nose, trying to skim away, but the left strut hit the center of the glass. It was only for an instant,
but that was all it took.
The Temple Room’s massive oculus exploded in a swirl of glass and wind . . . sending a torrent of jagged
shards plummeting into the room below.
Stars falling from heaven.
Mal’akh stared up into the beautiful white light and saw a veil of shimmering jewels fluttering toward him . .
. accelerating . . . as if racing to shroud him in their splendor.
Suddenly there was pain.
Everywhere.
Stabbing. Searing. Slashing. Razor-sharp knives piercing soft flesh. Chest, neck, thighs, face. His body
tightened all at once, recoiling. His blood-filled mouth cried out as the pain ripped him from his trance. The
white light above transformed itself, and suddenly, as if by magic, a dark helicopter was suspended above
him, its thundering blades driving an icy wind down into the Temple Room, chilling Mal’akh to the core and
dispersing the wisps of incense to the distant corners of the room.
Mal’akh turned his head and saw the Akedah knife lying broken by his side, smashed upon the granite altar,
which was covered in a blanket of shattered glass. Even after everything I did to him . . . Peter Solomon
averted the knife. He refused to spill my blood.
With welling horror, Mal’akh raised his head and peered down along the length of his own body. This living
artifact was to have been his great offering. But it lay in tatters. His body was drenched in blood . . . huge
shards of glass protruding from his flesh in all directions.
Weakly, Mal’akh lowered his head back to the granite altar and stared up through the open space in the roof.
The helicopter was gone now, in its place a silent, wintry moon.
Wide-eyed, Mal’akh lay gasping for breath . . . all alone on the great altar.
CHAPTER 122
The secret is how to die.
Mal’akh knew it had all gone wrong. There was no brilliant light. No wondrous reception. Only darkness and
excruciating pain. Even in his eyes. He could see nothing, and yet he sensed movement all around him. There
were voices . . . human voices . . . one of them, strangely, belonging to Robert Langdon. How can this be?
“She’s okay,” Langdon kept repeating. “Katherine is fine, Peter. Your sister is okay.”
No, Mal’akh thought. Katherine is dead. She must be.
Mal’akh could no longer see, could not tell if his eyes were even open, but he heard the helicopter banking
away. An abrupt calm settled through the Temple Room. Mal’akh could feel the smooth rhythms of the earth
becoming uneven . . . as if the ocean’s natural tides were being disrupted by a gathering storm.
Chao ab ordo.
Unfamiliar voices were shouting now, talking urgently with Langdon about the laptop and video file. It’s too
late, Mal’akh knew. The damage is done. By now the video was spreading like wildfire into every corner of a
shocked world, destroying the future of the brotherhood. Those most capable of spreading the wisdom must
be destroyed. The ignorance of mankind is what helped the chaos grow. The absence of Light on earth is
what nourished the Darkness that awaited Mal’akh.
I have done great deeds, and soon I will be received as a king.
Mal’akh sensed that a lone individual had quietly approached. He knew who it was. He could smell the
sacred oils he had rubbed into his father’s shaved body.
“I don’t know if you can hear me,” Peter Solomon whispered in his ear. “But I want you to know
something.” He touched a finger to the sacred spot atop Mal’akh’s skull. “What you wrote here . . .” He
paused. “This is not the Lost Word.”
Of course it is, Mal’akh thought. You convinced me of that beyond a doubt.
According to legend, the Lost Word was written in a language so ancient and arcane that mankind had all but
forgotten how to read it. This mysterious language, Peter had revealed, was in fact the oldest language on
earth.
The language of symbols.
In the idiom of symbology, there was one symbol that reigned supreme above all others. The oldest and most
universal, this symbol fused all the ancient traditions in a single solitary image that represented the
illumination of the Egyptian sun god, the triumph of alchemical gold, the wisdom of the Philosopher’s Stone,
the purity of the Rosicrucian Rose, the moment of Creation, the All, the dominance of the astrological sun,
and even the omniscient all-seeing eye that hovered atop the unfinished pyramid.
The circumpunct. The symbol of the Source. The origin of all things.
This is what Peter had told him moments ago. Mal’akh had been skeptical at first, but then he had looked
again at the grid, realizing that the image of the pyramid was pointing directly at the lone symbol of the
circumpunct—a circle with a dot in its center. The Masonic Pyramid is a map, he thought, recalling the
legend, which points to the Lost Word. It seemed his father was telling the truth after all.
All great truths are simple.
The Lost Word is not a word . . . it is a symbol.
Eagerly, Mal’akh had inscribed the great symbol of the circumpunct on his scalp. As he did so, he felt an
upwelling of power and satisfaction. My masterpiece and offering are complete. The forces of darkness were
waiting for him now. He would be rewarded for his work. This was to be his moment of glory . . .
And yet, at the last instant, everything had gone horribly wrong.
Peter was still behind him now, speaking words that Mal’akh could barely fathom. “I lied to you,” he was
saying. “You left me no choice. If I had revealed to you the true Lost Word, you would not have believed
me, nor would you have understood.”
The Lost Word is . . . not the circumpunct?
“The truth is,” said Peter, “the Lost Word is known to all . . . but recognized by very few.”
The words echoed in Mal’akh’s mind.
“You remain incomplete,” Peter said, gently placing his palm on top of Mal’akh’s head. “Your work is not
yet done. But wherever you are going, please know this . . . you were loved.”
For some reason, the gentle touch of his father’s hand felt like it was burning through him like a potent
catalyst that was initiating a chemical reaction inside Mal’akh’s body. Without warning, he felt a rush of
blistering energy surging through his physical shell, as if every cell in his body were now dissolving.
In an instant, all of his worldly pain evaporated.
Transformation. It’s happening.
I am gazing down upon myself, a wreck of bloody flesh on the sacred slab of granite. My father is kneeling
behind me, holding my lifeless head with his one remaining hand.
I feel an upwelling of rage . . . and confusion.
This is not a moment for compassion . . . it is for revenge, for transformation . . . and yet still my father
refuses to submit, refuses to fulfill his role, refuses to channel his pain and anger through the knife blade and
into my heart.
I am trapped here, hovering . . . tethered to my earthly shell.
My father gently runs a soft palm across my face to close my fading eyes.
I feel the tether release.
A billowing veil materializes around me, thickening and dimming the light, hiding the world from view.
Suddenly time accelerates, and I am plunging into an abyss far darker than any I have ever imagined. Here,
in the barren void, I hear a whispering . . . I sense a gathering force. It strengthens, mounting at a startling
rate, surrounding me. Ominous and powerful. Dark and commanding.
I am not alone here.
This is my triumph, my grand reception. And yet, for some reason, I am filled not with joy, but rather with
boundless fear.
It is nothing like I expect.
The force is churning now, swirling around me with commanding strength, threatening to tear me apart.
Suddenly, without warning, the blackness gathers itself like a great prehistoric beast and rears up before me.
I am facing all the dark souls who have gone before.
I am screaming in infinite terror . . . as the darkness swallows me whole.
CHAPTER 123
Inside the National Cathedral, Dean Galloway sensed a strange change in the air. He was not sure why, but
he felt as if a ghostly shadow had evaporated . . . as if a weight had been lifted . . . far away and yet right
here.
Alone at his desk, he was deep in thought. He was not sure how many minutes had passed when his phone
rang. It was Warren Bellamy.
“Peter’s alive,” his Masonic brother said. “I just heard the news. I knew you’d want to know immediately.
He’s going to be okay.”
“Thank God.” Galloway exhaled. “Where is he?”
Galloway listened as Bellamy recounted the extraordinary tale of what had transpired after they had left
Cathedral College.
“But all of you are okay?”
“Recuperating, yes,” Bellamy said. “There is one thing, though.” He paused.
“Yes?”
“The Masonic Pyramid . . . I think Langdon may have solved it.”
Galloway had to smile. Somehow he was not surprised. “And tell me, did Langdon discover whether or not
the pyramid kept its promise? Whether or not it revealed what legend always claimed it would reveal?”
“I don’t know yet.”
It will, Galloway thought. “You need to rest.”
“As do you.”
No, I need to pray.
CHAPTER 124
When the elevator door opened, the lights in the Temple Room were all ablaze.
Katherine Solomon’s legs still felt rubbery as she hurried in to find her brother. The air in this enormous
chamber was cold and smelled of incense. The scene that greeted her stopped her in her tracks.
In the center of this magnificent room, on a low stone altar, lay a bloody, tattooed corpse, a body perforated
by spears of broken glass. High above, a gaping hole in the ceiling opened to the heavens.
My God. Katherine immediately looked away, her eyes scanning for Peter. She found her brother sitting on
the other side of the room, being tended to by a medic while talking with Langdon and Director Sato.
“Peter!” Katherine called, running over. “Peter!”
Her brother glanced up, his expression filling with relief. He was on his feet at once, moving toward her. He
was wearing a simple white shirt and dark slacks, which someone had probably gotten for him from his
office downstairs. His right arm was in a sling, and their gentle embrace was awkward, but Katherine barely
noticed. A familiar comfort surrounded her like a cocoon, as it always had, even in childhood, when her
protective older brother embraced her.
They held each other in silence.
Finally Katherine whispered, “Are you okay? I mean . . . really?” She released him, looking down at the sling
and bandage where his right hand used to be. Tears welled again in her eyes. “I’m so . . . so sorry.”
Peter shrugged as if it were nothing of consequence. “Mortal flesh. Bodies don’t last forever. The important
thing is that you’re okay.”
Peter’s lighthearted response tore at her emotions, reminding her of all the reasons she loved him. She
stroked his head, feeling the unbreakable bonds of family . . . the shared blood that flowed in their veins.
Tragically, she knew there was a third Solomon in the room tonight. The corpse on the altar drew her gaze,
and Katherine shuddered deeply, trying to block out the photos she had seen.
She looked away, her eyes now finding Robert Langdon’s. There was compassion there, deep and perceptive,
as if Langdon somehow knew exactly what she was thinking. Peter knows. Raw emotion gripped
Katherine—relief, sympathy, despair. She felt her brother’s body begin trembling like a child’s. It was
something she had never witnessed in her entire life.
“Just let it go,” she whispered. “It’s okay. Just let it go.”
Peter’s trembling grew deeper.
She held him again, stroking the back of his head. “Peter, you’ve always been the strong one . . . you’ve
always been there for me. But I’m here for you now. It’s okay. I’m right here.”
Katherine eased his head gently onto her shoulder . . . and the great Peter Solomon collapsed sobbing in her
arms.
Director Sato stepped away to take an incoming call.
It was Nola Kaye. Her news, for a change, was good.
“Still no signs of distribution, ma’am.” She sounded hopeful. “I’m confident we would have seen something
by now. It looks like you contained it.”
Thanks to you, Nola, Sato thought, glancing down at the laptop, which Langdon had seen complete its
transmission. A very close call.
At Nola’s suggestion, the agent searching the mansion had checked the garbage cans, discovering packaging
for a newly purchased cellular modem. With the exact model number, Nola had been able to cross-reference
compatible carriers, bandwidths, and service grids, isolating the laptop’s most likely access node—a small
transmitter on the corner of Sixteenth and Corcoran—three blocks from the Temple.
Nola quickly relayed the information to Sato in the helicopter. On approach toward the House of the Temple,
the pilot had performed a low-altitude flyover and pulsed the relay node with a blast of electromagnetic
radiation, knocking it off-line only seconds before the laptop completed its transfer.
“Great work tonight,” Sato said. “Now get some sleep. You’ve earned it.”
“Thank you, ma’am.” Nola hesitated.
“Was there something else?”
Nola was silent a long moment, apparently considering whether or not to speak. “Nothing that can’t wait till
morning, ma’am. Have a good night.”
CHAPTER 125
In the silence of an elegant bathroom on the ground floor of the House of the Temple, Robert Langdon ran
warm water into a tile sink and eyed himself in the mirror. Even in the muted light, he looked like he felt . . .
utterly spent.
His daybag was on his shoulder again, much lighter now . . . empty except for his personal items and some
crumpled lecture notes. He had to chuckle. His visit to D.C. tonight to give a lecture had turned out a bit
more grueling than he’d anticipated.
Even so, Langdon had a lot to be grateful for.
Peter is alive.
And the video was contained.
As Langdon scooped handfuls of warm water onto his face, he gradually felt himself coming back to life.
Everything was still a blur, but the adrenaline in his body was finally dissipating . . . and he was feeling like
himself again. After drying his hands, he checked his Mickey Mouse watch.
My God, it’s late.
Langdon exited the bathroom and wound his way along the curved wall of the Hall of Honor—a gracefully
arched passageway, lined with portraits of accomplished Masons . . . U.S. presidents, philanthropists,
luminaries, and other influential Americans. He paused at an oil painting of Harry S. Truman and tried to
imagine the man undergoing the rites, rituals, and studies required to become a Mason.
There is a hidden world behind the one we all see. For all of us.
“You slipped away,” a voice said down the hall.
Langdon turned.
It was Katherine. She’d been through hell tonight, and yet she looked suddenly radiant . . . rejuvenated
somehow.
Langdon gave a tired smile. “How’s he doing?”
Katherine walked up and embraced him warmly. “How can I ever thank you?”
He laughed. “You know I didn’t do anything, right?”
Katherine held him for a long time. “Peter’s going to be fine . . .” She let go and looked deep into Langdon’s
eyes. “And he just told me something incredible . . . something wonderful.” Her voice trembled with
anticipation. “I need to go see it for myself. I’ll be back in a bit.”
“What? Where are you going?”
“I won’t be long. Right now, Peter wants to speak with you . . . alone. He’s waiting in the library.”
“Did he say why?”
Katherine chuckled and shook her head. “You know Peter and his secrets.”
“But—”
“I’ll see you in a bit.”
Then she was gone.
Langdon sighed heavily. He felt like he’d had enough secrets for one night. There were unanswered
questions, of course—the Masonic Pyramid and the Lost Word among them—but he sensed that the answers,
if they even existed, were not for him. Not as a non-Mason.
Mustering the last of his energy, Langdon made his way to the Masonic library. When he arrived, Peter was
sitting all alone at a table with the stone pyramid before him.
“Robert?” Peter smiled and waved him in. “I’d like a word.”
Langdon managed a grin. “Yes, I hear you lost one.”
CHAPTER 126
The library in the House of the Temple was D.C.’s oldest public reading room. Its elegant stacks burgeoned
with over a quarter of a million volumes, including a rare copy of the Ahiman Rezon, The Secrets of a
Prepared Brother. In addition, the library displayed precious Masonic jewels, ritual artifacts, and even a rare
volume that had been hand-printed by Benjamin Franklin.
Langdon’s favorite library treasure, however, was one few ever noticed.
The illusion.
Solomon had shown him long ago that from the proper vantage point, the library’s reading desk and golden
table lamp created an unmistakable optical illusion . . . that of a pyramid and shining golden capstone.
Solomon said he always considered the illusion a silent reminder that the mysteries of Freemasonry were
perfectly visible to anyone and everyone if they were seen from the proper perspective.
Tonight, however, the mysteries of Freemasonry had materialized front and center. Langdon now sat
opposite the Worshipful Master Peter Solomon and the Masonic Pyramid.
Peter was smiling. “The ‘word’ you refer to, Robert, is not a legend. It is a reality.”
Langdon stared across the table and finally spoke. “But . . . I don’t understand. How is that possible?”
“What is so difficult to accept?”
All of it! Langdon wanted to say, searching his old friend’s eyes for any hint of common sense. “You’re
saying you believe the Lost Word is real . . . and that it has actual power?”
“Enormous power,” Peter said. “It has the power to transform human kind by unlocking the Ancient
Mysteries.”
“A word?” Langdon challenged. “Peter, I can’t possibly believe a word—”
“You will believe,” Peter stated calmly.
Langdon stared in silence.
“As you know,” Solomon continued, standing now and pacing around the table, “it has long been prophesied
that there will come a day when the Lost Word will be rediscovered . . . a day when it will be unearthed . . .
and mankind will once again have access to its forgotten power.”
Langdon flashed on Peter’s lecture about the Apocalypse. Although many people erroneously interpreted
apocalypse as a cataclysmic end of the world, the word literally signified an “unveiling,” predicted by the
ancients to be that of great wisdom. The coming age of enlightenment. Even so, Langdon could not imagine
such a vast change being ushered in by . . . a word.
Peter motioned to the stone pyramid, which sat on the table beside its golden capstone. “The Masonic
Pyramid,” he said. “The legendary symbolon. Tonight it stands unified . . . and complete.” Reverently, he
lifted the golden capstone and set it atop the pyramid. The heavy gold piece clicked softly into place.
“Tonight, my friend, you have done what has never been done before. You have assembled the Masonic
Pyramid, deciphered all of its codes, and in the end, unveiled . . . this.”
Solomon produced a sheet of paper and laid it on the table. Langdon recognized the grid of symbols that had
been reorganized using the Order Eight Franklin Square. He had studied it briefly in the Temple Room.
Peter said, “I am curious to know if you can read this array of symbols. After all, you are the specialist.”
Langdon eyed the grid.
Heredom, circumpunct, pyramid, staircase . . .
Langdon sighed. “Well, Peter, as you can probably see, this is an allegorical pictogram. Clearly its language
is metaphorical and symbolic rather than literal.”
Solomon chuckled. “Ask a symbologist a simple question . . . Okay, tell me what you see.”
Peter really wants to hear this? Langdon pulled the page toward him. “Well, I looked at it earlier, and, in
simple terms, I see that this grid is a picture . . . depicting heaven and earth.”
Peter arched his eyebrows, looking surprised. “Oh?”
“Sure. At the top of the image, we have the word Heredom—the ‘Holy House’—which I interpret as the
House of God . . . or heaven.”
“Okay.”
“The downward-facing arrow after Heredom signifies that the rest of the pictogram clearly lies in the realm
beneath heaven . . . that being . . . earth.” Langdon’s eyes glided now to the bottom of the grid. “The lowest
two rows, those beneath the pyramid, represent the earth itself—terra firma—the lowest of all the realms.
Fittingly, these lower realms contain the twelve ancient astrological signs, which represent the primordial
religion of those first human souls who looked to the heavens and saw the hand of God in the movement of
the stars and planets.”
Solomon slid his chair closer and studied the grid. “Okay, what else?”
“On a foundation of astrology,” Langdon continued, “the great pyramid rises from the earth . . . stretching
toward heaven . . . the enduring symbol of lost wisdom. It is filled with history’s great philosophies and
religions . . . Egyptian, Pythagorean, Buddhist, Hindu, Islamic, Judeo-Christian, and on and on . . . all
flowing upward, merging together, funneling themselves up through the transformative gateway of the
pyramid . . . where they finally fuse into a single, unified human philosophy.” He paused. “A single universal
consciousness . . . a shared global vision of God . . . represented by the ancient symbol that hovers over the
capstone.”
“The circumpunct,” Peter said. “A universal symbol for God.”
“Right. Throughout history, the circumpunct has been all things to all people—it is the sun god Ra,
alchemical gold, the all-seeing eye, the singularity point before the Big Bang, the—”
“The Great Architect of the Universe.”
Langdon nodded, sensing this was probably the same argument Peter had used in the Temple Room to sell
the idea of the circumpunct as the Lost Word.
“And finally?” Peter asked. “What about the staircase?”
Langdon glanced down at the image of the stairs beneath the pyramid. “Peter, I’m sure you know as well as
anyone, this symbolizes the Winding Staircase of Freemasonry . . . leading upward out of the earthly
darkness into the light . . . like Jacob’s ladder climbing to heaven . . . or the tiered human spine that connects
man’s mortal body to his eternal mind.” He paused. “As for the rest of the symbols, they appear to be a blend
of celestial, Masonic, and scientific, all lending support to the Ancient Mysteries.”
Solomon stroked his chin. “An elegant interpretation, Professor. I agree, of course, that this grid can be read
as allegory, and yet . . .” His eyes flashed with deepening mystery. “This collection of symbols tells another
story as well. A story that is far more revealing.”
“Oh?”
Solomon began pacing again, circling the table. “Earlier tonight, inside the Temple Room, when I believed I
was going to die, I looked at this grid, and somehow I saw past the metaphor, past the allegory, into the very
heart of what these symbols are telling us.” He paused, turning abruptly to Langdon. “This grid reveals the
exact location where the Lost Word is buried.”
“Come again?” Langdon shifted uneasily in his chair, suddenly fearing that the trauma of the evening had left
Peter disorientated and confused.
“Robert, legend has always described the Masonic Pyramid as a map—a very specific map—a map that
could guide the worthy to the secret location of the Lost Word.” Solomon tapped the grid of symbols in front
of Langdon. “I guarantee you, these symbols are exactly what legend says they are . . . a map. A specific
diagram that reveals exactly where we will find the staircase that leads down to the Lost Word.”
Langdon gave an uneasy laugh, treading carefully now. “Even if I believed the Legend of the Masonic
Pyramid, this grid of symbols can’t possibly be a map. Look at it. It looks nothing like a map.”
Solomon smiled. “Sometimes all it takes is a tiny shift of perspective to see something familiar in a totally
new light.”
Langdon looked again but saw nothing new.
“Let me ask you a question,” Peter said. “When Masons lay cornerstones, do you know why we lay them in
the northeast corner of a building?”
“Sure, because the northeast corner receives the first rays of morning light. It is symbolic of the power of
architecture to climb out of the earth into the light.”
“Right,” Peter said. “So perhaps you should look there for the first rays of light.” He motioned to the grid.
“In the northeast corner.”
Langdon returned his eyes to the page, moving his gaze to the upper right or northeast corner. The symbol in
that corner was .
“A downward-pointing arrow,” Langdon said, trying to grasp Solomon’s point. “Which means . . . beneath
Heredom.”
“No, Robert, not beneath,” Solomon replied. “Think. This grid is not a metaphorical maze. It’s a map. And
on a map, a directional arrow that points down means—”
“South,” Langdon exclaimed, startled.
“Exactly!” Solomon replied, grinning now with excitement. “Due south! On a map, down is south. Moreover,
on a map, the word Heredom would not be a metaphor for heaven, it would be the name of a geographic
location.”
“The House of the Temple? You’re saying this map is pointing . . . due south of this building?”
“Praise God!” Solomon said, laughing. “Light dawns at last.”
Langdon studied the grid. “But, Peter . . . even if you’re right, due south of this building could be anywhere
on a longitude that’s over twenty-four thousand miles long.”
“No, Robert. You are ignoring the legend, which claims the Lost Word is buried in D.C. That shortens the
line substantially. In addition, legend also claims that a large stone sits atop the opening of the staircase . . .
and that this stone is engraved with a message in an ancient language . . . as a kind of marker so the worthy
can find it.”
Langdon was having trouble taking any of this seriously, and while he didn’t know D.C. well enough to
picture what was due south of their current location, he was pretty certain there was no huge engraved stone
atop a buried staircase.
“The message inscribed on the stone,” Peter said, “is right here before our eyes.” He tapped the third row of
the grid before Langdon. “This is the inscription, Robert! You’ve solved the puzzle!”
Dumbfounded, Langdon studied the seven symbols.
Solved? Langdon had no idea whatsoever what these seven disparate symbols could possibly mean, and he
was damned sure they were not engraved anywhere in the nation’s capital . . . particularly on a giant stone
over a staircase.
“Peter,” he said, “I don’t see how this sheds any light at all. I know of no stone in D.C. engraved with this . . .
message.”
Solomon patted him on the shoulder. “You have walked past it and never seen it. We all have. It is sitting in
plain view, like the mysteries themselves. And tonight, when I saw these seven symbols, I realized in an
instant that the legend was true. The Lost Word is buried in D.C. . . . and it does rest at the bottom of a long
staircase beneath an enormous engraved stone.”
Mystified, Langdon remained silent.
“Robert, tonight I believe you have earned the right to know the truth.”
Langdon stared at Peter, trying to process what he had just heard. “You’re going to tell me where the Lost
Word is buried?”
“No,” Solomon said, standing up with a smile. “I’m going to show you.”
Five minutes later, Langdon was buckling himself into the backseat of the Escalade beside Peter Solomon.
Simkins climbed in behind the wheel as Sato approached across the parking lot.
“Mr. Solomon?” the director said, lighting a cigarette as she arrived. “I’ve just made the call you requested.”
“And?” Peter asked through his open window.
“I ordered them to give you access. Briefly.”
“Thank you.”
Sato studied him, looking curious. “I must say, it’s a most unusual request.”
Solomon gave an enigmatic shrug.
Sato let it go, circling around to Langdon’s window and rapping with her knuckles.
Langdon lowered the window.
“Professor,” she said, with no hint of warmth. “Your assistance tonight, while reluctant, was critical to our
success . . . and for that, I thank you.” She took a long drag on her cigarette and blew it sideways. “However,
one final bit of advice. The next time a senior administrator of the CIA tells you she has a national-security
crisis . . .” Her eyes flashed black. “Leave the bullshit in Cambridge.”
Langdon opened his mouth to speak, but Director Inoue Sato had already turned and was headed off across
the parking lot toward a waiting helicopter.
Simkins glanced over his shoulder, stone-faced. “Are you gentlemen ready?”
“Actually,” Solomon said, “just one moment.” He produced a small, folded piece of dark fabric and handed it
to Langdon. “Robert, I’d like you to put this on before we go anywhere.”
Puzzled, Langdon examined the cloth. It was black velvet. As he unfolded it, he realized he was holding a
Masonic hoodwink—the traditional blindfold of a first-degree initiate. What the hell?
Peter said, “I’d prefer you not see where we’re going.”
Langdon turned to Peter. “You want to blindfold me for the journey?”
Solomon grinned. “My secret. My rules.”
CHAPTER 127
The breeze felt cold outside CIA headquarters in Langley. Nola Kaye was shivering as she followed sys-sec
Rick Parrish across the agency’s moonlit central courtyard.
Where is Rick taking me?
The crisis of the Masonic video had been averted, thank God, but Nola still felt uneasy. The redacted file on
the CIA director’s partition remained a mystery, and it was nagging at her. She and Sato would debrief in the
morning, and Nola wanted all the facts. Finally, she had called Rick Parrish and demanded his help.
Now, as she followed Rick to some unknown location outside, Nola could not push the bizarre phrases from
her memory:
Secret location underground where the . . . somewhere in Washington, D.C., the coordinates . . . uncovered
an ancient portal that led . . . warning the pyramid holds dangerous . . . decipher this engraved symbolon to
unveil . . .
“You and I agree,” Parrish said as they walked, “that the hacker who spidered those keywords was definitely
searching for information about the Masonic Pyramid.”
Obviously, Nola thought.
“It turns out, though, the hacker stumbled onto a facet of the Masonic mystery I don’t think he expected.”
“What do you mean?”
“Nola, you know how the CIA director sponsors an internal discussion forum for Agency employees to share
their ideas about all kinds of things?”
“Of course.” The forums provided Agency personnel a safe place to chat online about various topics and
gave the director a kind of virtual gateway to his staff.
“The director’s forums are hosted on his private partition, and yet in order to provide access to employees of
all clearance levels, they’re located outside the director’s classified firewall.”
“What are you getting at?” she demanded as they rounded a corner near the Agency cafeteria.
“In a word . . .” Parrish pointed into the darkness. “That.”
Nola glanced up. Across the plaza in front of them was a massive metal sculpture glimmering in the
moonlight.
In an agency that boasted over five hundred pieces of original art, this sculpture—titled Kryptos—was by far
the most famous. Greek for “hidden,” Kryptos was the work of American artist James Sanborn and had
become something of a legend here at the CIA.
The work consisted of a massive S-shaped panel of copper, set on its edge like a curling metal wall.
Engraved into the expansive surface of the wall were nearly two thousand letters . . . organized into a baffling
code. As if this were not enigmatic enough, positioned carefully in the area around the encrypted S-wall were
numerous other sculptural elements—granite slabs at odd angles, a compass rose, a magnetic lodestone, and
even a message in Morse code that referenced “lucid memory” and “shadow forces.” Most fans believed that
these pieces were clues that would reveal how to decipher the sculpture.
Kryptos was art . . . but it was also an enigma.
Attempting to decipher its encoded secret had become an obsession for cryptologists both inside and outside
the CIA. Finally, a few years back, a portion of the code had been broken, and it became national news.
Although much of Kryptos’s code remained unsolved to this day, the sections that had been deciphered were
so bizarre that they made the sculpture only more mysterious. It referenced secret underground locations,
portals that led into ancient tombs, longitudes and latitudes . . .
Nola could still recall bits and pieces of the deciphered sections: The information was gathered and
transmitted underground to an unknown location . . . It was totally invisible . . . hows that possible . . . they
used the earths magnetic field . . .
Nola had never paid much attention to the sculpture or cared if it was ever fully deciphered. At the moment,
however, she wanted answers. “Why are you showing me Kryptos?”
Parrish gave her a conspiratorial smile and dramatically extracted a folded sheet of paper from his pocket.
“Voilà, the mysterious redacted document you were so concerned about. I accessed the complete text.”
Nola jumped. “You snooped the director’s classified partition?”
“No. That’s what I was getting at earlier. Have a look.” He handed her the file.
Nola seized the page and unfolded it. When she saw the standard Agency headers at the top of the page, she
cocked her head in surprise.
This document was not classified. Not even close.
EMPLOYEE DISCUSSION BOARD: KRYPTOS
COMPRESSED STORAGE: THREAD #2456282.5
Nola found herself looking at a series of postings that had been compressed into a single page for more
efficient storage.
“Your keyword document,” Rick said, “is some cipher-punks rambling about Kryptos.”
Nola scanned down the document until she spotted a sentence containing a familiar set of keywords.
Jim, the sculpture says it was transmitted to a secret location UNDERGROUND where the info was hidden.
“This text is from the director’s online Kryptos forum,” Rick explained. “The forum’s been going for years.
There are literally thousands of postings. I’m not surprised one of them happened to contain all the
keywords.”
Nola kept scanning down until she spotted another posting containing keywords.
Even though Mark said the code’s lat/long headings point somewhere in WASHINGTON, D.C., the
coordinates he used were off by one degree--Kryptos basically points back to itself.
Parrish walked over to the statue and ran his palm across the cryptic sea of letters. “A lot of this code has yet
to be deciphered, and there are plenty of people who think the message might actually relate to ancient
Masonic secrets.”
Nola now recalled murmurs of a Masonic/Kryptos link, but she tended to ignore the lunatic fringe. Then
again, looking around at the various pieces of the sculpture arranged around the plaza, she realized that it was
a code in pieces—a symbolon—just like the Masonic Pyramid.
Odd.
For a moment, Nola could almost see Kryptos as a modern Masonic Pyramid—a code in many pieces, made
of different materials, each playing a role. “Do you think there’s any way Kryptos and the Masonic Pyramid
might be hiding the same secret?”
“Who knows?” Parrish shot Kryptos a frustrated look. “I doubt we’ll ever know the whole message. That is,
unless someone can convince the director to unlock his safe and sneak a peek at the solution.”
Nola nodded. It was all coming back to her now. When Kryptos was installed, it arrived with a sealed
envelope containing a complete decryption of the sculpture’s codes. The sealed solution was entrusted to
then–CIA director William Webster, who locked it in his office safe. The document was allegedly still there,
having been transferred from director to director over the years.
Strangely, Nola’s thoughts of William Webster sparked her memory, bringing back yet another portion of
Kryptos’s deciphered text:
IT’S BURIED OUT THERE SOMEWHERE.
WHO KNOWS THE EXACT LOCATION?
ONLY WW.
Although nobody knew exactly what was buried out there, most people believed the WW was a reference to
William Webster. Nola had heard whispers once that it referred in fact to a man named William Whiston—a
Royal Society theologian—although she had never bothered to give it much thought.
Rick was talking again. “I’ve got to admit, I’m not really into artists, but I think this guy Sanborn’s a serious
genius. I was just looking online at his Cyrillic Projector project? It shines giant Russian letters from a KGB
document on mind control. Freaky.”
Nola was no longer listening. She was examining the paper, where she had found the third key phrase in
another posting.
Right, that whole section is verbatim from some famous archaeologist’s diary, telling about the moment he
dug down and uncovered an ANCIENT PORTAL that led to the tomb of Tutankhamen.
The archaeologist who was quoted on Kryptos, Nola knew, was in fact famed Egyptologist Howard Carter.
The next posting referenced him by name.
I just skimmed the rest of Carter’s field notes online, and it sounds like he found a clay tablet warning the
PYRAMID holds dangerous consequences for anyone who disturbs the peace of the pharaoh. A curse!
Should we be worried? :)
Nola scowled. “Rick, for God’s sake, this idiot’s pyramid reference isn’t even right. Tutankhamen wasn’t
buried in a pyramid. He was buried in the Valley of the Kings. Don’t cryptologists watch the Discovery
Channel?”
Parrish shrugged. “Techies.”
Nola now saw the final key phrase.
Guys, you know I’m not a conspiracy theorist, but Jim and Dave had better decipher this ENGRAVED
SYMBOLON to unveil its final secret before the world ends in 2012 . . . Ciao.
“Anyhow,” Parrish said, “I figured you’d want to know about the Kryptos forum before you accused the CIA
director of harboring classified documentation about an ancient Masonic legend. Somehow, I doubt a man as
powerful as the CIA director has time for that sort of thing.”
Nola pictured the Masonic video and its images of all the influential men participating in an ancient rite. If
Rick had any idea . . .
In the end, she knew, whatever Kryptos ultimately revealed, the message definitely had mystical undertones.
She gazed up at the gleaming piece of art—a three-dimensional code standing silently at the heart of one of
the nation’s premier intelligence agencies—and she wondered if it would ever give up its final secret.
As she and Rick headed back inside, Nola had to smile.
It’s buried out there somewhere.
CHAPTER 128
This is crazy.
Blindfolded, Robert Langdon could see nothing as the Escalade sped southward along the deserted streets.
On the seat beside him, Peter Solomon remained silent.
Where is he taking me?
Langdon’s curiosity was a mix of intrigue and apprehension, his imagination in overdrive as it tried
desperately to put the pieces together. Peter had not wavered from his claim. The Lost Word? Buried at the
bottom of a staircase that’s covered by a massive, engraved stone? It all seemed impossible.
The stone’s alleged engraving was still lodged in Langdon’s memory . . . and yet the seven symbols, as far as
he could tell, made no sense together at all.
The Stonemason’s Square: the symbol of honesty and being “true.”
The letters Au: the scientific abbreviation for the element gold.
The Sigma: the Greek letter S, the mathematical symbol for the sum of all parts.
The Pyramid: the Egyptian symbol of man reaching heavenward.
The Delta: the Greek letter D, the mathematical symbol for change.
Mercury: as depicted by its most ancient alchemical symbol.
The Ouroboros: the symbol of wholeness and at-one-ment.
Solomon still insisted these seven symbols were a “message.” But if this was true, then it was a message
Langdon had no idea how to read.
The Escalade slowed suddenly and turned sharply right, onto a different surface, as if into a driveway or
access road. Langdon perked up, listening intently for clues as to their whereabouts. They’d been driving for
less than ten minutes, and although Langdon had tried to follow in his mind, he had lost his bearings quickly.
For all he knew, they were now pulling back into the House of the Temple.
The Escalade came to a stop, and Langdon heard the window roll down.
“Agent Simkins, CIA,” their driver announced. “I believe you’re expecting us.”
“Yes, sir,” a sharp military voice replied. “Director Sato phoned ahead. One moment while I move the
security barricade.”
Langdon listened with rising confusion, now sensing they were entering a military base. As the car began
moving again, along an unusually smooth stretch of pavement, he turned his head blindly toward Solomon.
“Where are we, Peter?” he demanded.
“Do not remove your blindfold.” Peter’s voice was stern.
The vehicle continued a short distance and again slowed to a stop. Simkins killed the engine. More voices.
Military. Someone asked for Simkins’s identification. The agent got out and spoke to the men in hushed
tones.
Langdon’s door was suddenly being opened, and powerful hands assisted him out of the car. The air felt
cold. It was windy.
Solomon was beside him. “Robert, just let Agent Simkins lead you inside.”
Langdon heard metal keys in a lock . . . and then the creak of a heavy iron door swinging open. It sounded
like an ancient bulkhead. Where the hell are they taking me?!
Simkins’s hands guided Langdon in the direction of the metal door. They stepped over a threshold. “Straight
ahead, Professor.”
It was suddenly quiet. Dead. Deserted. The air inside smelled sterile and processed.
Simkins and Solomon flanked Langdon now, guiding him blindly down a reverberating corridor. The floor
felt like stone beneath his loafers.
Behind them, the metal door slammed loudly, and Langdon jumped. The locks turned. He was sweating now
beneath his blindfold. He wanted only to tear it off.
They stopped walking now.
Simkins let go of Langdon’s arm, and there was a series of electronic beeps followed by an unexpected
rumble in front of them, which Langdon imagined had to be a security door sliding open automatically.
“Mr. Solomon, you and Mr. Langdon continue on alone. I’ll wait for you here,” Simkins said. “Take my
flashlight.”
“Thank you,” Solomon said. “We won’t be long.”
Flashlight?! Langdon’s heart was pounding wildly now.
Peter took Langdon’s arm in his own and inched forward. “Walk with me, Robert.”
They moved slowly together across another threshold, and the security door rumbled shut behind them.
Peter stopped short. “Is something wrong?”
Langdon was suddenly feeling queasy and off balance. “I think I just need to take off this blindfold.”
“Not yet, we’re almost there.”
“Almost where?” Langdon felt a growing heaviness in the pit of his stomach.
“I told you—I’m taking you to see the staircase that descends to the Lost Word.”
“Peter, this isn’t funny!”
“It’s not meant to be. It’s meant to open your mind, Robert. It’s meant to remind you that there are mysteries
in this world that even you have yet to lay eyes upon. And before I take one more step with you, I want you
to do something for me. I want you to believe . . . just for an instant . . . believe in the legend. Believe that
you are about to peer down a winding staircase that plunges hundreds of feet to one of humankind’s greatest
lost treasures.”
Langdon felt dizzy. As much as he wanted to believe his dear friend, he could not. “Is it much farther?” His
velvet hoodwink was drenched in sweat.
“No. Only a few more steps, actually. Through one last door. I’ll open it now.”
Solomon let go of him for a moment, and as he did so, Langdon swayed, feeling light-headed. Unsteady, he
reached out for stability, and Peter was quickly back at his side. The sound of a heavy automatic door
rumbled in front of them. Peter took Langdon’s arm and they moved forward again.
“This way.”
They inched across another threshold, and the door slid closed behind them.
Silence. Cold.
Langdon immediately sensed that this place, whatever it was, had nothing to do with the world on the other
side of the security doors. The air was dank and chilly, like a tomb. The acoustics felt dull and cramped. He
felt an irrational bout of claustrophobia settling in.
“A few more steps.” Solomon guided him blindly around a corner and positioned him precisely. Finally, he
said, “Take off your blindfold.”
Langdon seized the velvet hoodwink and tore it from his face. He looked all around to find out where he was,
but he was still blind. He rubbed his eyes. Nothing. “Peter, it’s pitch-black!”
“Yes, I know. Reach in front of you. There’s a railing. Grasp it.”
Langdon groped in the darkness and found an iron railing.
“Now watch.” He could hear Peter fumbling with something, and suddenly a blazing flashlight beam pierced
the darkness. It was pointed at the floor, and before Langdon could take in his surroundings, Solomon
directed the flashlight out over the railing and pointed the beam straight down.
Langdon was suddenly staring into a bottomless shaft . . . an endless winding staircase that plunged deep into
the earth. My God! His knees nearly buckled, and he gripped the railing for support. The staircase was a
traditional square spiral, and he could see at least thirty landings descending into the earth before the
flashlight faded to nothing. I can’t even see the bottom!
“Peter . . .” he stammered. “What is this place!”
“I’ll take you to the bottom of the staircase in a moment, but before I do, you need to see something else.”
Too overwhelmed to protest, Langdon let Peter guide him away from the stairwell and across the strange
little chamber. Peter kept the flashlight trained on the worn stone floor beneath their feet, and Langdon could
get no real sense of the space around them . . . except that it was small.
A tiny stone chamber.
They arrived quickly at the room’s opposite wall, in which was embedded a rectangle of glass. Langdon
thought it might be a window into a room beyond, and yet from where he stood, he saw only darkness on the
other side.
“Go ahead,” Peter said. “Have a look.”
“What’s in there?” Langdon flashed for an instant on the Chamber of Reflection beneath the Capitol
Building, and how he had believed, for a moment, that it might contain a portal to some giant underground
cavern.
“Just look, Robert.” Solomon inched him forward. “And brace yourself, because the sight will shock you.”
Having no idea what to expect, Langdon moved toward the glass. As he neared the portal, Peter turned out
the flashlight, plunging the tiny chamber into total darkness.
As his eyes adjusted, Langdon groped in front of him, his hands finding the wall, finding the glass, his face
moving closer to the transparent portal.
Still only darkness beyond.
He leaned closer . . . pressing his face to the glass.
Then he saw it.
The wave of shock and disorientation that tore through Langdon’s body reached down inside and spun his
internal compass upside down. He nearly fell backward as his mind strained to accept the utterly
unanticipated sight that was before him. In his wildest dreams, Robert Langdon would never have guessed
what lay on the other side of this glass.
The vision was a glorious sight.
There in the darkness, a brilliant white light shone like a gleaming jewel.
Langdon now understood it all—the barricade on the access road . . . the guards at the main entrance . . . the
heavy metal door outside . . . the automatic doors that rumbled open and closed . . . the heaviness in his
stomach . . . the lightness in his head . . . and now this tiny stone chamber.
“Robert,” Peter whispered behind him, “sometimes a change of perspective is all it takes to see the light.”
Speechless, Langdon stared out through the window. His gaze traveled into the darkness of the night,
traversing more than a mile of empty space, dropping lower . . . lower . . . through the darkness . . . until it
came to rest atop the brilliantly illuminated, stark white dome of the U.S. Capitol Building.
Langdon had never seen the Capitol from this perspective—hovering 555 feet in the air atop America’s great
Egyptian obelisk. Tonight, for the first time in his life, he had ridden the elevator up to the tiny viewing
chamber . . . at the pinnacle of the Washington Monument.
CHAPTER 129
Robert Langdon stood mesmerized at the glass portal, absorbing the power of the landscape below him.
Having ascended unknowingly hundreds of feet into the air, he was now admiring one of the most
spectacular vistas he had ever seen.
The shining dome of the U.S. Capitol rose like a mountain at the east end of the National Mall. On either side
of the building, two parallel lines of light stretched toward him . . . the illuminated facades of the
Smithsonian museums . . . beacons of art, history, science, culture.
Langdon now realized to his astonishment that much of what Peter had declared to be true . . . was in fact
true. There is indeed a winding staircase . . . descending hundreds of feet beneath a massive stone. The huge
capstone of this obelisk sat directly over his head, and Langdon now recalled a forgotten bit of trivia that
seemed to have eerie relevance: the capstone of the Washington Monument weighed precisely thirty-three
hundred pounds.
Again, the number 33.
More startling, however, was the knowledge that this capstone’s ultimate peak, the zenith of this obelisk, was
crowned by a tiny, polished tip of aluminum—a metal as precious as gold in its day. The shining apex of the
Washington Monument was only about a foot tall, the same size as the Masonic Pyramid. Incredibly, this
small metal pyramid bore a famous engraving—Laus Deo— and Langdon suddenly understood. This is the
true message of the base of the stone pyramid.
The seven symbols are a transliteration!
The simplest of ciphers.
The symbols are letters.
The stonemason’s square—L
The element gold—AU
The Greek Sigma—S
The Greek Delta—D
Alchemical mercury—E
The Ouroboros—O
“Laus Deo,” Langdon whispered. The well-known Latin phrase—meaning “praise God”—was inscribed on
the tip of the Washington Monument in script letters only one inch tall. On full display . . . and yet invisible
to all.
Laus Deo.
“Praise God,” Peter said behind him, flipping on the soft lighting in the chamber. “The Masonic Pyramid’s
final code.”
Langdon turned. His friend was grinning broadly, and Langdon recalled that Peter had actually spoken the
words “praise God” earlier inside the Masonic library. And I still missed it.
Langdon felt a chill to realize how apt it was that the legendary Masonic Pyramid had guided him here . . . to
America’s great obelisk—the symbol of ancient mystical wisdom—rising toward the heavens at the heart of
a nation.
In a state of wonder, Langdon began moving counterclockwise around the perimeter of the tiny square room,
arriving now at another viewing window.
North.
Through this northward-facing window, Langdon gazed down at the familiar silhouette of the White House
directly in front of him. He raised his eyes to the horizon, where the straight line of Sixteenth Street ran due
north toward the House of the Temple.
I am due south of Heredom.
He continued around the perimeter to the next window. Looking west, Langdon’s eyes traced the long
rectangle of the reflecting pool to the Lincoln Memorial, its classical Greek architecture inspired by the
Parthenon in Athens, Temple to Athena—goddess of heroic undertakings.
Annuit coeptis, Langdon thought. God favors our undertaking.
Continuing to the final window, Langdon gazed southward across the dark waters of the Tidal Basin, where
the Jefferson Memorial shone brightly in the night. The gently sloping cupola, Langdon knew, was modeled
after the Pantheon, the original home to the great Roman gods of mythology.
Having looked in all four directions, Langdon now thought about the aerial photos he had seen of the
National Mall—her four arms outstretched from the Washington Monument toward the cardinal points of the
compass. I am standing at the crossroads of America.
Langdon continued back around to where Peter was standing. His mentor was beaming. “Well, Robert, this is
it. The Lost Word. This is where it’s buried. The Masonic Pyramid led us here.”
Langdon did a double take. He had all but forgotten about the Lost Word.
“Robert, I know of nobody more trustworthy than you. And after a night like tonight, I believe you deserve to
know what this is all about. As promised in legend, the Lost Word is indeed buried at the bottom of a
winding staircase.” He motioned to the mouth of the monument’s long stairwell.
Langdon had finally started to get his feet back under him, but now he was puzzled.
Peter quickly reached into his pocket and pulled out a small object. “Do you remember this?”
Langdon took the cube-shaped box that Peter had entrusted to him long ago. “Yes . . . but I’m afraid I didn’t
do a very good job of protecting it.”
Solomon chuckled. “Perhaps the time had come for it to see the light of day.”
Langdon eyed the stone cube, wondering why Peter had just handed it to him.
“What does this look like to you?” Peter asked.
Langdon eyed the 1514 and recalled his first impression when Katherine had unwrapped the package.
“A cornerstone.”
“Exactly,” Peter replied. “Now, there are a few things you might not know about cornerstones. First, the
concept of laying a cornerstone comes from the Old Testament.”
Langdon nodded. “The Book of Psalms.”
“Correct. And a true cornerstone is always buried beneath the ground—symbolizing the building’s initial
step upward out of the earth toward the heavenly light.”
Langdon glanced out at the Capitol, recalling that its cornerstone was buried so deep in the foundation that,
to this day, excavations had been unable to find it.
“And finally,” Solomon said, “like the stone box in your hand, many cornerstones are little vaults . . . and
have hollow cavities so that they can hold buried treasures . . . talismans, if you will—symbols of hope for
the future of the building about to be erected.”
Langdon was well aware of this tradition, too. Even today, Masons laid cornerstones in which they sealed
meaningful objects—time capsules, photos, proclamations, even the ashes of important people.
“My purpose in telling you this,” Solomon said, glancing over at the stairwell, “should be clear.”
“You think the Lost Word is buried in the cornerstone of the Washington Monument?”
“I don’t think, Robert. I know. The Lost Word was buried in the cornerstone of this monument on July 4,
1848, in a full Masonic ritual.”
Langdon stared at him. “Our Masonic forefathers buried a word?!”
Peter nodded. “They did indeed. They understood the true power of what they were burying.”
All night, Langdon had been trying to wrap his mind around sprawling, ethereal concepts . . . the Ancient
Mysteries, the Lost Word, the Secrets of the Ages. He wanted something solid, and despite Peter’s claims
that the key to it all was buried in a cornerstone 555 feet beneath him, Langdon was having a hard time
accepting it. People study the mysteries for entire lifetimes and are still unable to access the power allegedly
hidden there. Langdon flashed on Dürer’s Melencolia I—the image of the dejected Adept, surrounded by the
tools of his failed efforts to unveil the mystical secrets of alchemy. If the secrets can actually be unlocked,
they will not be found in one place!
Any answer, Langdon had always believed, was spread across the world in thousands of volumes . . .
encoded into writings of Pythagoras, Hermes, Heraclitus, Paracelsus, and hundreds of others. The answer
was found in dusty, forgotten tomes on alchemy, mysticism, magic, and philosophy. The answer was hidden
in the ancient library of Alexandria, the clay tablets of Sumer, and the hieroglyphs of Egypt.
“Peter, I’m sorry,” Langdon said quietly, shaking his head. “To understand the Ancient Mysteries is a
lifelong process. I can’t imagine how the key could possibly rest within a single word.”
Peter placed a hand on Langdon’s shoulder. “Robert, the Lost Word is not a ‘word.’” He gave a sage smile.
“We only call it the ‘Word’ because that’s what the ancients called it . . . in the beginning.”
CHAPTER 130
In the beginning was the Word.
Dean Galloway knelt at the Great Crossing of the National Cathedral and prayed for America. He prayed that
his beloved country would soon come to grasp the true power of the Word—the recorded collection of the
written wisdom of all the ancient masters—the spiritual truths taught by the great sages.
History had blessed mankind with the wisest of teachers, profoundly enlightened souls whose understanding
of the spiritual and mental mysteries exceeded all understanding. The precious words of these Adepts—
Buddha, Jesus, Muhammad, Zoroaster, and countless others—had been transmitted through history in the
oldest and most precious of vessels.
Books.
Every culture on earth had its own sacred book—its own Word—each one different and yet each one the
same. For Christians, the Word was the Bible, for Muslims the Koran, for Jews the Torah, for Hindus the
Vedas, and on and on it went.
The Word shall light the way.
For America’s Masonic forefathers, the Word had been the Bible. And yet few people in history have
understood its true message.
Tonight, as Galloway knelt alone within the great cathedral, he placed his hands upon the Word—a wellworn
copy of his own Masonic Bible. This treasured book, like all Masonic Bibles, contained the Old
Testament, the New Testament, and a treasure trove of Masonic philosophical writings.
Although Galloway’s eyes could no longer read the text, he knew the preface by heart. Its glorious message
had been read by millions of his brethren in countless languages around the world.
The text read:
TIME IS A RIVER . . . AND BOOKS ARE BOATS. MANY VOLUMES START DOWN THAT
STREAM, ONLY TO BE WRECKED AND LOST BEYOND RECALL IN ITS SANDS. ONLY A FEW, A
VERY FEW, ENDURE THE TESTINGS OF TIME AND LIVE TO BLESS THE AGES FOLLOWING.
There is a reason these volumes survived, while others vanished. As a scholar of faith, Dean Galloway had
always found it astonishing that the ancient spiritual texts—the most studied books on earth—were, in fact,
the least understood.
Concealed within those pages, there hides a wondrous secret.
One day soon the light would dawn, and mankind would finally begin to grasp the simple, transformative
truth of the ancient teachings . . . and take a quantum leap forward in understanding his own magnificent
nature.
CHAPTER 131
The winding staircase that descends the spine of the Washington Monument consists of 896 stone steps that
spiral around an open elevator shaft. Langdon and Solomon were making their way down, Langdon still
grappling with the startling fact that Peter had shared with him only moments ago: Robert, buried within the
hollow cornerstone of this monument, our forefathers placed a single copy of the Word—the Bible—which
waits in darkness at the foot of this staircase.
As they descended, Peter suddenly stopped on a landing and swung his flashlight beam to illuminate a large
stone medallion embedded in the wall.
What in the world?! Langdon jumped when he saw the carving.
The medallion depicted a frightening cloaked figure holding a scythe and kneeling beside an hourglass. The
figure’s arm was raised, and his index finger was extended, pointing directly at a large open Bible, as if to
say: “The answer is in there!”
Langdon stared at the carving and then turned to Peter.
His mentor’s eyes shone with mystery. “I’d like you to consider something, Robert.” His voice echoed down
the empty stairwell. “Why do you think the Bible has survived thousands of years of tumultuous history?
Why is it still here? Is it because its stories are such compelling reading? Of course not . . . but there is a
reason. There is a reason Christian monks spend lifetimes attempting to decipher the Bible. There is a reason
that Jewish mystics and Kabbalists pore over the Old Testament. And that reason, Robert, is that there exist
powerful secrets hidden in the pages of this ancient book . . . a vast collection of untapped wisdom waiting to
be unveiled.”
Langdon was no stranger to the theory that the Scriptures contained a hidden layer of meaning, a concealed
message that was veiled in allegory, symbolism, and parable.
“The prophets warn us,” Peter continued, “that the language used to share their secret mysteries is a cryptic
one. The Gospel of Mark tells us, ‘Unto you is given to know the mystery . . . but it will be told in parable.’
Proverbs cautions that the sayings of the wise are ‘riddles,’ while Corinthians talks of ‘hidden wisdom.’ The
Gospel of John forewarns: ‘I will speak to you in parable . . . and use dark sayings.’ ”
Dark sayings, Langdon mused, knowing this strange phrase made numerous odd appearances in Proverbs as
well as in Psalm 78. I will open my mouth in a parable and utter dark sayings of old. The concept of a “dark
saying,” Langdon had learned, did not mean that the saying was “evil” but rather that its true meaning was
shadowed or obscured from the light.
“And if you have any doubts,” Peter added, “Corinthians overtly tells us that the parables have two layers of
meaning: ‘milk for babes and meat for men’—where the milk is a watered-down reading for infantile minds,
and the meat is the true message, accessible only to mature minds.”
Peter raised the flashlight, again illuminating the carving of the cloaked figure pointing intently at the Bible.
“I know you are a skeptic, Robert, but consider this. If the Bible does not contain hidden meaning, then why
have so many of history’s finest minds—including brilliant scientists at the Royal Society—become so
obsessed with studying it? Sir Isaac Newton wrote more than a million words attempting to decipher the true
meaning of the Scripture, including a 1704 manuscript that claimed he had extracted hidden scientific
information from the Bible!”
Langdon knew this was true.
“And Sir Francis Bacon,” Peter continued, “the luminary hired by King James to literally create the
authorized King James Bible, became so utterly convinced that the Bible contained cryptic meaning that he
wrote in his own codes, which are still studied today! Of course, as you know, Bacon was a Rosicrucian and
penned The Wisdom of the Ancients.” Peter smiled. “Even the iconoclastic poet William Blake hinted that we
should read between the lines.”
Langdon was familiar with the verse:
BOTH READ THE BIBLE DAY AND NIGHT,
BUT THOU READ BLACK WHERE I READ WHITE.
“And it wasn’t just the European luminaries,” Peter continued, descending faster now. “It was here, Robert,
at the very core of this young American nation, that our brightest forefathers—John Adams, Ben Franklin,
Thomas Paine—all warned of the profound dangers of interpreting the Bible literally. In fact, Thomas
Jefferson was so convinced the Bible’s true message was hidden that he literally cut up the pages and
reedited the book, attempting, in his words, ‘to do away with the artificial scaffolding and restore the genuine
doctrines.’ ”
Langdon was well aware of this strange fact. The Jeffersonian Bible was still in print today and included
many of his controversial revisions, among them the removal of the virgin birth and the resurrection.
Incredibly, the Jeffersonian Bible had been presented to every incoming member of Congress during the first
half of the nineteenth century.
“Peter, you know I find this topic fascinating, and I can understand that it might be tempting for bright minds
to imagine the Scriptures contain hidden meaning, but it makes no logical sense to me. Any skilled professor
will tell you that teaching is never done in code.”
“I’m sorry?”
“Teachers teach, Peter. We speak openly. Why would the prophets—the greatest teachers in history—
obscure their language? If they hoped to change the world, why would they speak in code? Why not speak
plainly so the world could understand?”
Peter glanced back over his shoulder as he descended, looking surprised by the question. “Robert, the Bible
does not talk openly for the same reason the Ancient Mystery Schools were kept hidden . . . for the same
reason the neophytes had to be initiated before learning the secret teachings of the ages . . . for the same
reason the scientists in the Invisible College refused to share their knowledge with others. This information is
powerful, Robert. The Ancient Mysteries cannot be shouted from the rooftops. The mysteries are a flaming
torch, which, in the hands of a master, can light the way, but which, in the hands of a madman, can scorch the
earth.”
Langdon stopped short. What is he saying? “Peter, I’m talking about the Bible. Why are you talking about
the Ancient Mysteries?”
Peter turned. “Robert, don’t you see? The Ancient Mysteries and the Bible are the same thing.”
Langdon stared in bewilderment.
Peter was silent for several seconds, waiting for the concept to soak in. “The Bible is one of the books
through which the mysteries have been passed down through history. Its pages are desperately trying to tell
us the secret. Don’t you understand? The ‘dark sayings’ in the Bible are the whispers of the ancients, quietly
sharing with us all of their secret wisdom.”
Langdon said nothing. The Ancient Mysteries, as he understood them, were a kind of instruction manual for
harnessing the latent power of the human mind . . . a recipe for personal apotheosis. He had never been able
to accept the power of the mysteries, and certainly the notion that the Bible was somehow hiding a key to
these mysteries was an impossible stretch.
“Peter, the Bible and the Ancient Mysteries are total opposites. The mysteries are all about the god within
you . . . man as god. The Bible is all about the God above you . . . and man as a powerless sinner.”
“Yes! Exactly! You’ve put your finger on the precise problem! The moment mankind separated himself
from God, the true meaning of the Word was lost. The voices of the ancient masters have now been drowned
out, lost in the chaotic din of self-proclaimed practitioners shouting that they alone understand the Word . . .
that the Word is written in their language and none other.”
Peter continued down the stairs.
“Robert, you and I both know that the ancients would be horrified if they saw how their teachings have been
perverted . . . how religion has established itself as a tollbooth to heaven . . . how warriors march into battle
believing God favors their cause. We’ve lost the Word, and yet its true meaning is still within reach, right
before our eyes. It exists in all the enduring texts, from the Bible to the Bhagavad Gita to the Koran and
beyond. All of these texts are revered upon the altars of Freemasonry because Masons understand what the
world seems to have forgotten . . . that each of these texts, in its own way, is quietly whispering the exact
same message.” Peter’s voice welled with emotion. “ ‘Know ye not that ye are gods?’”
Langdon was struck by the way this famous ancient saying kept surfacing tonight. He had reflected on it
while talking to Galloway and also at the Capitol Building while trying to explain The Apotheosis of
Washington.
Peter lowered his voice to a whisper. “The Buddha said, ‘You are God yourself.’ Jesus taught that ‘the
kingdom of God is within you’ and even promised us, ‘The works I do, you can do . . . and greater.’ Even the
first antipope—Hippolytus of Rome—quoted the same message, first uttered by the gnostic teacher
Monoimus: ‘Abandon the search for God . . . instead, take yourself as the starting place.’ ”
Langdon flashed on the House of the Temple, where the Masonic Tyler’s chair bore two words of guidance
carved across its back: KNOW THYSELF.
“A wise man once told me,” Peter said, his voice faint now, “the only difference between you and God is that
you have forgotten you are divine.”
“Peter, I hear you—I do. And I’d love to believe we are gods, but I see no gods walking our earth. I see no
superhumans.You can point to the alleged miracles of the Bible, or any other religious text, but they are
nothing but old stories fabricated by man and then exaggerated over time.”
“Perhaps,” Peter said. “Or perhaps we simply need our science to catch up with the wisdom of the ancients.”
He paused. “Funny thing is . . . I believe Katherine’s research may be poised to do just that.”
Langdon suddenly remembered that Katherine had dashed off from the House of the Temple earlier. “Hey,
where did she go, anyway?”
“She’ll be here shortly,” Peter said, grinning. “She went to confirm a wonderful bit of good fortune.”
Outside, at the base of the monument, Peter Solomon felt invigorated as he inhaled the cold night air. He
watched in amusement as Langdon stared intently at the ground, scratching his head and looking around at
the foot of the obelisk.
“Professor,” Peter joked, “the cornerstone that contains the Bible is underground. You can’t actually access
the book, but I assure you it’s there.”
“I believe you,” Langdon said, appearing lost in thought. “It’s just . . . I noticed something.”
Langdon stepped back now and surveyed the giant plaza on which the Washington Monument stood. The
circular concourse was made entirely of white stone . . . except for two decorative courses of dark stone,
which formed two concentric circles around the monument.
“A circle within a circle,” Langdon said. “I never realized the Washington Monument stands at the center of
a circle within a circle.”
Peter had to laugh. He misses nothing. “Yes, the great circumpunct . . . the universal symbol for God . . . at
the crossroads of America.” He gave a coy shrug. “I’m sure it’s just a coincidence.”
Langdon seemed far off, gazing skyward now, his eyes ascending the illuminated spire, which shone stark
white against the black winter sky.
Peter sensed Langdon was beginning to see this creation for what it truly was . . . a silent reminder of ancient
wisdom . . . an icon of enlightened man at the heart of a great nation. Even though Peter could not see the
tiny aluminum tip at the top, he knew it was there, man’s enlightened mind straining toward heaven.
Laus Deo.
“Peter?” Langdon approached, looking like a man who’d endured some kind of mystical initiation. “I almost
forgot,” he said, reaching into his pocket and producing Peter’s gold Masonic ring. “I’ve been wanting to
return this to you all night.”
“Thank you, Robert.” Peter held out his left hand and took the ring, admiring it. “You know, all the secrecy
and mystery surrounding this ring and the Masonic Pyramid . . . it had an enormous effect on my life. When I
was a young man, the pyramid was given to me with the promise that it hid mystical secrets. Its mere
existence made me believe there were great mysteries in the world. It piqued my curiosity, fueled my sense
of wonder, and inspired me to open my mind to the Ancient Mysteries.” He smiled quietly and slipped the
ring into his pocket. “I now realize that the Masonic Pyramid’s true purpose was not to reveal the answers,
but rather to inspire a fascination with them.”
The two men stood in silence for a long while at the foot of the monument.
When Langdon finally spoke, his tone was serious. “I need to ask you a favor, Peter . . . as a friend.”
“Of course. Anything.”
Langdon made his request . . . firmly.
Solomon nodded, knowing he was right. “I will.”
“Right away,” Langdon added, motioning to the waiting Escalade.
“Okay . . . but one caveat.”
Langdon rolled his eyes, chuckling. “Somehow you always get the last word.”
“Yes, and there is one final thing I want you and Katherine to see.”
“At this hour?” Langdon checked his watch.
Solomon smiled warmly at his old friend. “It is Washington’s most spectacular treasure . . . and something
very, very few people have ever seen.”
CHAPTER 132
Katherine Solomon’s heart felt light as she hurried up the hill toward the base of the Washington
Monument. She had endured great shock and tragedy tonight, and yet her thoughts were refocused now, if
only temporarily, on the wonderful news Peter had shared with her earlier . . . news she had just confirmed
with her very own eyes.
My research is safe. All of it.
Her lab’s holographic data drives had been destroyed tonight, but earlier, at the House of the Temple, Peter
had informed her that he had been secretly keeping backups of all her Noetic research in the SMSC executive
offices. You know I’m utterly fascinated with your work, he had explained, and I wanted to follow your
progress without disturbing you.
“Katherine?” a deep voice called out.
She looked up.
A lone figure stood in silhouette at the base of the illuminated monument.
“Robert!” She hurried over and hugged him.
“I heard the good news,” Langdon whispered. “You must be relieved.”
Her voice cracked with emotion. “Incredibly.” The research Peter had saved was a scientific tour de force—a
massive collection of experiments that proved human thought was a real and measurable force in the world.
Katherine’s experiments demonstrated the effect of human thought on everything from ice crystals to
random-event generators to the movement of subatomic particles. The results were conclusive and
irrefutable, with the potential to transform skeptics into believers and affect global consciousness on a
massive scale. “Everything is going to change, Robert. Everything.”
“Peter certainly thinks so.”
Katherine glanced around for her brother.
“Hospital,” Langdon said. “I insisted he go as a favor to me.”
Katherine exhaled, relieved. “Thank you.”
“He told me to wait for you here.”
Katherine nodded, her gaze climbing the glowing white obelisk. “He said he was bringing you here.
Something about ‘Laus Deo’? He didn’t elaborate.”
Langdon gave a tired chuckle. “I’m not sure I entirely understand it myself.” He glanced up at the top of the
monument. “Your brother said quite a few things tonight that I couldn’t get my mind around.”
“Let me guess,” Katherine said. “Ancient Mysteries, science, and the Holy Scriptures?”
“Bingo.”
“Welcome to my world.” She winked. “Peter initiated me into this long ago. It fueled a lot of my research.”
“Intuitively, some of what he said made sense.” Langdon shook his head. “But intellectually . . .”
Katherine smiled and put her arm around him. “You know, Robert, I may be able to help you with that.”
Deep inside the Capitol Building, Architect Warren Bellamy was walking down a deserted hallway.
Only one thing left to do tonight, he thought.
When he arrived at his office, he retrieved a very old key from his desk drawer. The key was black iron, long
and slender, with faded markings. He slid it into his pocket and then prepared himself to welcome his guests.
Robert Langdon and Katherine Solomon were on their way to the Capitol. At Peter’s request, Bellamy was to
provide them with a very rare opportunity—the chance to lay eyes upon this building’s most magnificent
secret . . . something that could be revealed only by the Architect.
CHAPTER 133
High above the floor of the Capitol Rotunda, Robert Langdon inched nervously around the circular catwalk
that extended just beneath the ceiling of the dome. He peered tentatively over the railing, dizzied by the
height, still unable to believe it had been less than ten hours since Peter’s hand had appeared in the middle of
the floor below.
On that same floor, the Architect of the Capitol was now a tiny speck some hundred and eighty feet below,
moving steadily across the Rotunda and then disappearing. Bellamy had escorted Langdon and Katherine up
to this balcony, leaving them here with very specific instructions.
Peter’s instructions.
Langdon eyed the old iron key that Bellamy had handed to him. Then he glanced over at a cramped stairwell
that ascended from this level . . . climbing higher still. God help me. These narrow stairs, according to the
Architect, led up to a small metal door that could be unlocked with the iron key in Langdon’s hand.
Beyond the door lay something that Peter insisted Langdon and Katherine see. Peter had not elaborated, but
rather had left strict instructions regarding the precise hour at which the door was to be opened. We have to
wait to open the door? Why?
Langdon checked his watch again and groaned.
Slipping the key into his pocket, he gazed across the gaping void before him at the far side of the balcony.
Katherine had walked fearlessly ahead, apparently unfazed by the height. She was now halfway around the
circumference, admiring every inch of Brumidi’s The Apotheosis of Washington, which loomed directly over
their heads. From this rare vantage point, the fifteen-foot-tall figures that adorned the nearly five thousand
square feet of the Capitol Dome were visible in astonishing detail.
Langdon turned his back to Katherine, faced the outer wall, and whispered very quietly, “Katherine, this is
your conscience speaking. Why did you abandon Robert?”
Katherine was apparently familiar with the dome’s startling acoustical properties . . . because the wall
whispered back. “Because Robert is being a chicken. He should come over here with me. We have plenty of
time before we’re allowed to open that door.”
Langdon knew she was right and reluctantly made his way around the balcony, hugging the wall as he went.
“This ceiling is absolutely amazing,” Katherine marveled, her neck craned to take in the enormous splendor
of the Apotheosis overhead. “Mythical gods all mixed in with scientific inventors and their creations? And to
think this is the image at the center of our Capitol.”
Langdon turned his eyes upward to the sprawling forms of Franklin, Fulton, and Morse with their
technological inventions. A shining rainbow arched away from these figures, guiding his eye to George
Washington ascending to heaven on a cloud. The great promise of man becoming God.
Katherine said, “It’s as if the entire essence of the Ancient Mysteries is hovering over the Rotunda.”
Langdon had to admit, not many frescoes in the world fused scientific inventions with mythical gods and
human apotheosis. This ceiling’s spectacular collection of images was indeed a message of the Ancient
Mysteries, and it was here for a reason. The founding fathers had envisioned America as a blank canvas, a
fertile field on which the seeds of the mysteries could be sown. Today, this soaring icon—the father of our
country ascending to heaven—hung silently above our lawmakers, leaders, and presidents . . . a bold
reminder, a map to the future, a promise of a time when man would evolve to complete spiritual maturity.
“Robert,” Katherine whispered, her gaze still fixated on the massive figures of America’s great inventors
accompanied by Minerva. “It’s prophetic, really. Today, man’s most advanced inventions are being used to
study man’s most ancient ideas. The science of Noetics may be new, but it’s actually the oldest science on
earth—the study of human thought.” She turned to him now, her eyes filled with wonder. “And we’re
learning that the ancients actually understood thought more profoundly than we do today.”
“Makes sense,” Langdon replied. “The human mind was the only technology the ancients had at their
disposal. The early philosophers studied it relentlessly.”
“Yes! The ancient texts are obsessed with the power of the human mind. The Vedas describe the flow of
mind energy. The Pistis Sophia describes universal consciousness. The Zohar explores the nature of mind
spirit. The Shamanic texts predict Einstein’s ‘remote influence’ in terms of healing at a distance. It’s all
there! And don’t even get me started about the Bible.”
“You, too?” Langdon said, chuckling. “Your brother tried to convince me that the Bible is encoded with
scientific information.”
“It certainly is,” she said. “And if you don’t believe Peter, read some of Newton’s esoteric texts on the Bible.
When you start to understand the cryptic parables in the Bible, Robert, you realize it’s a study of the human
mind.”
Langdon shrugged. “I guess I’d better go back and read it again.”
“Let me ask you something,” she said, clearly not appreciating his skepticism. “When the Bible tells us to
‘go build our temple’ . . . a temple that we must ‘build with no tools and making no noise,’ what temple do
you think it’s talking about?”
“Well, the text does say your body is a temple.”
“Yes, Corinthians 3:16. You are the temple of God.” She smiled at him. “And the Gospel of John says the
exact same thing. Robert, the Scriptures are well aware of the power latent within us, and they are urging us
to harness that power . . . urging us to build the temples of our minds.”
“Unfortunately, I think much of the religious world is waiting for a real temple to be rebuilt. It’s part of the
Messianic Prophecy.”
“Yes, but that overlooks an important point. The Second Coming is the coming of man—the moment when
mankind finally builds the temple of his mind.”
“I don’t know,” Langdon said, rubbing his chin. “I’m no Bible scholar, but I’m pretty sure the Scriptures
describe in detail a physical temple that needs to be built. The structure is described as being in two parts—
an outer temple called the Holy Place and an inner sanctuary called the Holy of Holies. The two parts are
separated from each other by a thin veil.”
Katherine grinned. “Pretty good recall for a Bible skeptic. By the way, have you ever seen an actual human
brain? It’s built in two parts—an outer part called the dura mater and an inner part called the pia mater. These
two parts are separated by the arachnoid—a veil of weblike tissue.”
Langdon cocked his head in surprise.
Gently, she reached up and touched Langdon’s temple. “There’s a reason they call this your temple, Robert.”
As Langdon tried to process what Katherine had said, he flashed unexpectedly on the gnostic Gospel of
Mary: Where the mind is, there is the treasure.
“Perhaps you’ve heard,” Katherine said, softly now, “about the brain scans taken of yogis while they
meditate? The human brain, in advanced states of focus, will physically create a waxlike substance from the
pineal gland. This brain secretion is unlike anything else in the body. It has an incredible healing effect, can
literally regenerate cells, and may be one of the reasons yogis live so long. This is real science, Robert. This
substance has inconceivable properties and can be created only by a mind that is highly tuned to a deeply
focused state.”
“I remember reading about that a few years back.”
“Yes, and on that topic, you’re familiar with the Bible’s account of ‘manna from heaven’?”
Langdon saw no connection. “You mean the magical substance that fell from heaven to nourish the hungry?”
“Exactly. The substance was said to heal the sick, provide everlasting life, and, strangely, cause no waste in
those who consumed it.” Katherine paused, as if waiting for him to understand. “Robert?” she prodded. “A
kind of nourishment that fell from heaven?” She tapped her temple. “Magically heals the body? Creates no
waste? Don’t you see? These are code words, Robert! Temple is code for ‘body.’ Heaven is code for ‘mind.’
Jacob’s ladder is your spine. And manna is this rare brain secretion. When you see these code words in
Scripture, pay attention. They are often markers for a more profound meaning concealed beneath the
surface.”
Katherine’s words were coming out in rapid-fire succession now, explaining how this same magical
substance appeared throughout the Ancient Mysteries: Nectar of the Gods, Elixir of Life, Fountain of Youth,
Philosopher’s Stone, ambrosia, dew, ojas, soma. Then she launched into an explanation about the brain’s
pineal gland representing the all-seeing eye of God. “According to Matthew 6:22,” she said excitedly, “
‘when your eye is single, your body fills with light.’ This concept is also represented by the Ajna chakra and
the dot on a Hindu’s forehead, which—”
Katherine stopped short, looking sheepish. “Sorry . . . I know I’m rambling. I just find this all so exhilarating.
For years I’ve studied the ancients’ claims of man’s awesome mental power, and now science is showing us
that accessing that power is an actual physical process. Our brains, if used correctly, can call forth powers
that are quite literally superhuman. The Bible, like many ancient texts, is a detailed exposition of the most
sophisticated machine ever created . . . the human mind.” She sighed. “Incredibly, science has yet to scratch
the surface of the mind’s full promise.”
“It sounds like your work in Noetics will be a quantum leap forward.”
“Or backward,” she said. “The ancients already knew many of the scientific truths we’re now rediscovering.
Within a matter of years, modern man will be forced to accept what is now unthinkable: our minds can
generate energy capable of transforming physical matter.” She paused. “Particles react to our thoughts . . .
which means our thoughts have the power to change the world.”
Langdon smiled softly.
“What my research has brought me to believe is this,” Katherine said. “God is very real—a mental energy
that pervades everything. And we, as human beings, have been created in that image—”
“I’m sorry?” Langdon interrupted. “Created in the image of . . . mental energy?”
“Exactly. Our physical bodies have evolved over the ages, but it was our minds that were created in the
image of God. We’ve been reading the Bible too literally. We learn that God created us in his image, but it’s
not our physical bodies that resemble God, it’s our minds.”
Langdon was silent now, fully engrossed.
“This is the great gift, Robert, and God is waiting for us to understand it. All around the world, we are gazing
skyward, waiting for God . . . never realizing that God is waiting for us.” Katherine paused, letting her words
soak in. “We are creators, and yet we naively play the role of ‘the created.’ We see ourselves as helpless
sheep buffeted around by the God who made us. We kneel like frightened children, begging for help, for
forgiveness, for good luck. But once we realize that we are truly created in the Creator’s image, we will start
to understand that we, too, must be Creators. When we understand this fact, the doors will burst wide open
for human potential.”
Langdon recalled a passage that had always stuck with him from the work of the philosopher Manly P. Hall:
If the infinite had not desired man to be wise, he would not have bestowed upon him the faculty of knowing.
Langdon gazed up again at the image of The Apotheosis of Washington—the symbolic ascent of man to
deity. The created . . . becoming the Creator.
“The most amazing part,” Katherine said, “is that as soon as we humans begin to harness our true power, we
will have enormous control over our world. We will be able to design reality rather than merely react to it.”
Langdon lowered his gaze. “That sounds . . . dangerous.”
Katherine looked startled . . . and impressed. “Yes, exactly! If thoughts affect the world, then we must be
very careful how we think. Destructive thoughts have influence, too, and we all know it’s far easier to
destroy than it is to create.”
Langdon thought of all the lore about needing to protect the ancient wisdom from the unworthy and share it
only with the enlightened. He thought of the Invisible College, and the great scientist Isaac Newton’s request
to Robert Boyle to keep “high silence” about their secret research. It cannot be communicated, Newton wrote
in 1676, without immense damage to the world.
“There’s an interesting twist here,” Katherine said. “The great irony is that all the religions of the world, for
centuries, have been urging their followers to embrace the concepts of faith and belief. Now science, which
for centuries has derided religion as superstition, must admit that its next big frontier is quite literally the
science of faith and belief . . . the power of focused conviction and intention. The same science that eroded
our faith in the miraculous is now building a bridge back across the chasm it created.”
Langdon considered her words for a long time. Slowly he raised his eyes again to the Apotheosis. “I have a
question,” he said, looking back at Katherine. “Even if I could accept, just for an instant, that I have the
power to change physical matter with my mind, and literally manifest all that I desire . . . I’m afraid I see
nothing in my life to make me believe I have such power.”
She shrugged. “Then you’re not looking hard enough.”
“Come on, I want a real answer. That’s the answer of a priest. I want the answer of a scientist.”
“You want a real answer? Here it is. If I hand you a violin and say you have the capability to use it to make
incredible music, I am not lying. You do have the capability, but you’ll need enormous amounts of practice
to manifest it. This is no different from learning to use your mind, Robert. Well-directed thought is a learned
skill. To manifest an intention requires laserlike focus, full sensory visualization, and a profound belief. We
have proven this in a lab. And just like playing a violin, there are people who exhibit greater natural ability
than others. Look to history. Look to the stories of those enlightened minds who performed miraculous
feats.”
“Katherine, please don’t tell me you actually believe in the miracles. I mean, seriously . . . turning water into
wine, healing the sick with the touch of a hand?”
Katherine took a long breath and blew it out slowly. “I have witnessed people transform cancer cells into
healthy cells simply by thinking about them. I have witnessed human minds affecting the physical world in
myriad ways. And once you see that happen, Robert, once this becomes part of your reality, then some of the
miracles you read about become simply a matter of degree.”
Langdon was pensive. “It’s an inspiring way to see the world, Katherine, but for me, it just feels like an
impossible leap of faith. And as you know, faith has never come easily for me.”
“Then don’t think of it as faith. Think of it simply as changing your perspective, accepting that the world is
not precisely as you imagine. Historically, every major scientific breakthrough began with a simple idea that
threatened to overturn all of our beliefs. The simple statement ‘the earth is round’ was mocked as utterly
impossible because most people believed the oceans would flow off the planet. Heliocentricity was called
heresy. Small minds have always lashed out at what they don’t understand. There are those who create . . .
and those who tear down. That dynamic has existed for all time. But eventually the creators find believers,
and the number of believers reaches a critical mass, and suddenly the world becomes round, or the solar
system becomes heliocentric. Perception is transformed, and a new reality is born.”
Langdon nodded, his thoughts drifting now.
“You have a funny look on your face,” she said.
“Oh, I don’t know. For some reason I was just remembering how I used to canoe out into the middle of the
lake late at night, lie down under the stars, and think about stuff like this.”
She nodded knowingly. “I think we all have a similar memory. Something about lying on our backs staring
up at the heavens . . . opens the mind.” She glanced up at the ceiling and then said, “Give me your jacket.”
“What?” He took it off and gave it to her.
She folded it twice and laid it down on the catwalk like a long pillow. “Lie down.”
Langdon lay on his back, and Katherine positioned his head on half of the folded jacket. Then she lay down
beside him—two kids, shoulder to shoulder on the narrow catwalk, staring up at Brumidi’s enormous fresco.
“Okay,” she whispered. “Put yourself in that same mind-set . . . a kid lying out in a canoe . . . looking up at
the stars . . . his mind open and full of wonder.”
Langdon tried to obey, although at the moment, prone and comfortable, he was feeling a sudden wave of
exhaustion. As his vision blurred, he perceived a muted shape overhead that immediately woke him. Is that
possible? He could not believe he hadn’t noticed it before, but the figures in The Apotheosis of Washington
were clearly arranged in two concentric rings—a circle within a circle. The Apotheosis is also a
circumpunct? Langdon wondered what else he had missed tonight.
“There’s something important I want to tell you, Robert. There’s another piece to all this . . . a piece that I
believe is the single most astonishing aspect of my research.”
There’s more?
Katherine propped herself on her elbow. “And I promise . . . if we as humans can honestly grasp this one
simple truth . . . the world will change overnight.”
She now had his full attention.
“I should preface this,” she said, “by reminding you of the Masonic mantras to ‘gather what is scattered’ . . .
to bring ‘order from chaos’ . . . to find ‘at-one-ment.’ ”
“Go on.” Langdon was intrigued.
Katherine smiled down at him. “We have scientifically proven that the power of human thought grows
exponentially with the number of minds that share that thought.”
Langdon remained silent, wondering where she was going with this idea.
“What I’m saying is this . . . two heads are better than one . . . and yet two heads are not twice better, they are
many, many times better. Multiple minds working in unison magnify a thought’s effect . . . exponentially.
This is the inherent power of prayer groups, healing circles, singing in unison, and worshipping en masse.
The idea of universal consciousness is no ethereal New Age concept. It’s a hard-core scientific reality . . .
and harnessing it has the potential to transform our world. This is the underlying discovery of Noetic
Science. What’s more, it’s happening right now. You can feel it all around you. Technology is linking us in
ways we never imagined possible: Twitter, Google, Wikipedia, and others—all blend to create a web of
interconnected minds.” She laughed. “And I guarantee you, as soon as I publish my work, the Twitterati will
all be sending tweets that say, ‘learning about Noetics,’ and interest in this science will explode
exponentially.”
Langdon’s eyelids felt impossibly heavy. “You know, I still haven’t learned how to send a twitter.”
“A tweet,” she corrected, laughing.
“I’m sorry?”
“Never mind. Close your eyes. I’ll wake you when it’s time.”
Langdon realized he had all but forgotten the old key the Architect had given them . . . and why they had
come up here. As a new wave of exhaustion engulfed him, Langdon shut his eyes. In the darkness of his
mind, he found himself thinking about universal consciousness . . . about Plato’s writings on “the mind of the
world” and “gathering God” . . . Jung’s “collective unconscious.” The notion was as simple as it was
startling.
God is found in the collection of Many . . . rather than in the One.
“Elohim,” Langdon said suddenly, his eyes flying open again as he made an unexpected connection.
“I’m sorry?” Katherine was still gazing down at him.
“Elohim,” he repeated. “The Hebrew word for God in the Old Testament! I’ve always wondered about it.”
Katherine gave a knowing smile. “Yes. The word is plural.”
Exactly! Langdon had never understood why the very first passages of the Bible referred to God as a plural
being. Elohim. The Almighty God in Genesis was described not as One . . . but as Many.
“God is plural,” Katherine whispered, “because the minds of man are plural.”
Langdon’s thoughts were spiraling now . . . dreams, memories, hopes, fears, revelations . . . all swirling
above him in the Rotunda dome. As his eyes began to close again, he found himself staring at three words in
Latin, painted within the Apotheosis.
E PLURIBUS UNUM.
“Out of many, one,” he thought, slipping off into sleep.
Epilogue
Robert Langdon awoke slowly.
Faces gazed down at him. Where am I?
A moment later, he recalled where he was. He sat up slowly beneath the Apotheosis. His back felt stiff from
lying on the hard catwalk.
Where’s Katherine?
Langdon checked his Mickey Mouse watch. It’s almost time. He pulled himself to his feet, peering cautiously
over the banister into the gaping space below.
“Katherine?” he called out.
The word echoed back in the silence of the deserted Rotunda.
Retrieving his tweed jacket from the floor, he brushed it off and put it back on. He checked his pockets. The
iron key the Architect had given him was gone.
Making his way back around the walkway, Langdon headed for the opening the Architect had shown them . .
. steep metal stairs ascending into cramped darkness. He began to climb. Higher and higher he ascended.
Gradually the stairway became more narrow and more inclined. Still Langdon pushed on.
Just a little farther.
The steps had become almost ladderlike now, the passage frighteningly constricted. Finally, the stairs ended,
and Langdon stepped up onto a small landing. Before him was a heavy metal door. The iron key was in the
lock, and the door hung slightly ajar. He pushed, and the door creaked open. The air beyond felt cold. As
Langdon stepped across the threshold into murky darkness, he realized he was now outside.
“I was just coming to get you,” Katherine said, smiling at him. “It’s almost time.”
When Langdon recognized his surroundings, he drew a startled breath. He was standing on a tiny skywalk
that encircled the pinnacle of the U.S. Capitol Dome. Directly above him, the bronze Statue of Freedom
gazed out over the sleeping capital city. She faced the east, where the first crimson splashes of dawn had
begun to paint the horizon.
Katherine guided Langdon around the balcony until they were facing west, perfectly aligned with the
National Mall. In the distance, the silhouette of the Washington Monument stood in the early-morning light.
From this vantage point, the towering obelisk looked even more impressive than it had before.
“When it was built,” Katherine whispered, “it was the tallest structure on the entire planet.”
Langdon pictured the old sepia photographs of stonemasons on scaffolding, more than five hundred feet in
the air, laying each block by hand, one by one.
We are builders, he thought. We are creators.
Since the beginning of time, man had sensed there was something special about himself . . . something more.
He had longed for powers he did not possess. He had dreamed of flying, of healing, and of transforming his
world in every way imaginable.
And he had done just that.
Today, the shrines to man’s accomplishments adorned the National Mall. The Smithsonian museums
burgeoned with our inventions, our art, our science, and the ideas of our great thinkers. They told the history
of man as creator—from the stone tools in the Native American History Museum to the jets and rockets in
the National Air and Space Museum.
If our ancestors could see us today, surely they would think us gods.
As Langdon peered through the predawn mist at the sprawling geometry of museums and monuments before
him, his eyes returned to the Washington Monument. He pictured the lone Bible in the buried cornerstone
and thought of how the Word of God was really the word of man.
He thought about the great circumpunct, and how it had been embedded in the circular plaza beneath the
monument at the crossroads of America. Langdon thought suddenly of the little stone box Peter had entrusted
to him. The cube, he now realized, had unhinged and opened to form the same exact geometrical form—a
cross with a circumpunct at its center. Langdon had to laugh. Even that little box was hinting at this
crossroads.
“Robert, look!” Katherine pointed to the top of the monument.
Langdon lifted his gaze but saw nothing.
Then, staring more intently, he glimpsed it.
Across the Mall, a tiny speck of golden sunlight was glinting off the highest tip of the towering obelisk. The
shining pinpoint grew quickly brighter, more radiant, gleaming on the capstone’s aluminum peak. Langdon
watched in wonder as the light transformed into a beacon that hovered above the shadowed city. He pictured
the tiny engraving on the east-facing side of the aluminum tip and realized to his amazement that the first ray
of sunlight to hit the nation’s capital, every single day, did so by illuminating two words:
Laus Deo.
“Robert,” Katherine whispered. “Nobody ever gets to come up here at sunrise. This is what Peter wanted us
to witness.”
Langdon could feel his pulse quickening as the glow atop the monument intensified.
“He said he believes this is why the forefathers built the monument so tall. I don’t know if that’s true, but I
do know this—there’s a very old law decreeing that nothing taller can be built in our capital city. Ever.”
The light inched farther down the capstone as the sun crept over the horizon behind them. As Langdon
watched, he could almost sense, all around him, the celestial spheres tracing their eternal orbits through the
void of space. He thought of the Great Architect of the Universe and how Peter had said specifically that the
treasure he wanted to show Langdon could be unveiled only by the Architect. Langdon had assumed this
meant Warren Bellamy. Wrong Architect.
As the rays of sunlight strengthened, the golden glow engulfed the entirety of the thirty-three-hundred-pound
capstone. The mind of man . . . receiving enlightenment. The light then began inching down the monument,
commencing the same descent it performed every morning. Heaven moving toward earth . . . God connecting
to man. This process, Langdon realized, would reverse come evening. The sun would dip in the west, and the
light would climb again from earth back to heaven . . . preparing for a new day.
Beside him, Katherine shivered and inched closer. Langdon put his arm around her. As the two of them stood
side by side in silence, Langdon thought about all he had learned tonight. He thought of Katherine’s belief
that everything was about to change. He thought of Peter’s faith that an age of enlightenment was imminent.
And he thought of the words of a great prophet who had boldly declared: Nothing is hidden that will not be
made known; nothing is secret that will not come to light.
As the sun rose over Washington, Langdon looked to the heavens, where the last of the nighttime stars were
fading out. He thought about science, about faith, about man. He thought about how every culture, in every
country, in every time, had always shared one thing. We all had the Creator. We used different names,
different faces, and different prayers, but God was the universal constant for man. God was the symbol we all
shared . . . the symbol of all the mysteries of life that we could not understand. The ancients had praised God
as a symbol of our limitless human potential, but that ancient symbol had been lost over time. Until now.
In that moment, standing atop the Capitol, with the warmth of the sun streaming down all around him, Robert
Langdon felt a powerful upwelling deep within himself. It was an emotion he had never felt this profoundly
in his entire life.
Hope.

EOS

The Hunger Games


PART I"THE TRIBUTES"

1.

When I wake up, the other side of the bed is cold. My fingers stretch out, seeking Prims warmth but finding only the rough canvas cover of the mattress. She must have had bad dreams and climbed in with our mother. Of course, she did. This is the day of the reaping. I prop myself up on one elbow. Theres enough light in the bedroom to see them. My little sister, Prim, curled up on her side, cocooned in my mothers body, their cheeks pressed together. In sleep, my mother looks younger, still worn but not so beaten-down. Prims face is as fresh as a raindrop, as lovely as the primrose for which she was named. My mother was very beautiful once, too. Or so

they tell me. Sitting at Prims knees, guarding her, is the worlds ugliest cat. Mashed-in nose, half of one ear missing, eyes the color of rotting squash. Prim named him Buttercup, insisting that his muddy yellow coat matched the bright flower. I he hates me. Or at least distrusts me. Even though it was years ago, I think he still remembers how I tried to drown him in a bucket when Prim brought him home. Scrawny kitten, belly swollen with worms, crawling with fleas. The last thing I needed was another mouth to feed. But Prim begged so hard, cried even, I had to let him stay. It turned out okay. My mother got rid of the vermin and hes a born mouser. Even catches the occasional rat. Sometimes, when I clean a kill, I feed Buttercup the entrails. He has stopped hissing at me. Entrails. No hissing. This is the closest we will ever come to love. I swing my legs off the bed and slide into my hunting boots. Supple leather that has molded to my feet. I pull on trousers, a shirt, tuck my long dark braid up into a cap, and grab my forage bag. On the table, under a wooden bowl to protect it from hungry rats and cats alike, sits a perfect little goat cheese wrapped in basil leaves. Prims gift to me on reaping day. I put the cheese carefully in my pocket as I slip outside. Our part of District 12, nicknamed the Seam, is usually crawling with coal miners heading out to the morning shift at this hour. Men and women with hunched shoulders, swollen knuckles, many who have long since stopped trying to scrub the coal dust out of their broken nails, the lines of their sunken faces. But today the black cinder streets are empty. Shutters on the squat gray houses are closed. The reaping isnt until two. May as well sleep in. If you can. Our house is almost at the edge of the Seam. I only have to pass a few gates to reach the scruffy field called the Meadow. Separating the Meadow from the woods, in fact enclosing all of District 12, is a high chain-link fence topped with barbed-wire loops. In theory, its supposed to be electrified twenty-four hours a day as a deterrent to the predators that live in the woods packs of wild dogs, lone cougars, bears that used to threaten our streets. But since were lucky to get two or three hours of electricity in the evenings, its

usually safe to touch. Even so, I always take a moment to listen carefully for the hum that means the fence is live. Right now, its silent as a stone. Concealed by a clump of bushes, I flatten out on my belly and slide under a two-foot stretch thats

been loose for years. There are several other weak spots in the fence, but this one is so close to home I almost always enter the woods here. As soon as Im in the trees, I retrieve a bow and sheath of arrows from a hollow log. Electrified or not, the fence has been successful at keeping the flesh-eaters out of District 12. Inside the woods they roam freely, and there are added concerns like venomous snakes, rabid animals, and no real paths to follow. But theres also food if you know how to find it. My father knew and he taught me some before he was blown to bits in a mine explosion. There was nothing even to bury. I was eleven then. Five years later, I still wake up screaming for him to run. Even though trespassing in the woods is illegal and poaching carries the severest of penalties, more people would risk it if they had weapons. But most are not bold enough to venture out with just a knife. My bow is a rarity, crafted by my father along with a few others that I keep well hidden in the woods, carefully wrapped in waterproof covers. My father could have made good money selling them, but if the officials found out he would have been publicly executed for inciting a rebellion. Most of the Peacekeepers turn a blind eye to the few of us who hunt because theyre as hungry for fresh meat as anybody is. In fact, theyre among our best customers. But the idea that someone might be arming the Seam would never have been allowed. In the fall, a few brave souls sneak into the woods to harvest apples. But always in sight of the Meadow. Always close enough to run back to the safety of District 12 if trouble arises. District Twelve. Where you can starve to death in safety, I mutter. Then I glance quickly over my shoulder. Even here, even in the middle of nowhere, you worry someone might overhear you. When I was younger, I scared my mother to death, the things I would blurt out about District 12, about the people who rule our country, Panem, from the far-off city called the Capitol. Eventually I understood this would only lead us to more trouble. So I learned to hold my tongue and to turn my features into an indifferent mask so that no one could ever read my thoughts. Do my work quietly in school. Make only polite small talk in the public market. Discuss little more than trades in the Hob, which is the black market where I make most of my money. Even at home, where I am less pleasant, I avoid discussing tricky topics. Like the reaping, or food shortages, or the Hunger Games. Prim might begin to repeat my words and then where would we be? In the woods waits the only person with whom I can be myself. Gale. I can feel the

muscles in my face relaxing, my pace quickening as I climb the hills to our place, a rock ledge

overlooking a valley. A thicket of berry bushes protects it from unwanted eyes. The sight of him waiting there brings on a smile. Gale says I never smile except in the woods. Hey, Catnip, says Gale. My real name is Katniss, but when I first told him, I had barely whispered it. So he thought Id said Catnip. Then when this crazy lynx started following me around the woods looking for handouts, it became his official nickname for me. I finally had to kill the lynx because he scared off game. I almost regretted it because he wasnt bad company. But I got a decent price for his pelt. Look what I shot, Gale holds up a loaf of bread with an arrow stuck in it, and I laugh. Its real bakery bread, not the flat, dense loaves we make from our grain rations. I take it in my hands, pull out the arrow, and hold the puncture in the crust to my nose, inhaling the fragrance that makes my mouth flood with saliva. Fine bread like this is for special occasions. Mm, still warm, I say. He must have been at the bakery at the crack of dawn to trade for it. What did it cost you? Just a squirrel. Think the old man was feeling sentimental this morning, says Gale. Even wished me luck. Well, we all feel a little closer today, dont we? I say, not even bothering to roll my eyes. Prim left us a cheese. I pull it out. His expression brightens at the treat. Thank you, Prim. Well have a real feast. Suddenly he falls into a Capitol accent as he mimics Effie Trinket, the maniacally upbeat woman who arrives once a year to read out the names at the leaping. I almost forgot! Happy Hunger Games! He plucks a few blackberries from the bushes around us. And may the odds He tosses a berry in a high arc toward me. I catch it in my mouth and break the delicate skin with my teeth. The sweet tartness explodes across my tongue. Be ever in your favor! I finish with equal verve. We have to joke about it because the alternative is to be scared out of your wits. Besides, the Capitol accent is so affected, almost anything sounds funny in it. I watch as Gale pulls out his knife and slices the bread. He could be my brother. Straight black hair, olive skin, we even have the same gray eyes. But were not related, at least not closely. Most of the families who work the mines resemble one another this way. Thats why my mother and Prim, with their light hair and blue eyes, always look out of place. They are. My mothers parents were part of the small merchant class that

caters to officials, Peacekeepers, and the occasional Seam customer. They ran an apothecary shop in the nicer part of District 12. Since almost no one can afford doctors, apothecaries are our healers. My father got to know my mother because on his hunts he would sometimes collect medicinal herbs and sell them to her shop to be brewed into remedies. She must have really loved him to leave her home for the Seam. I try to remember that when all I can see is the woman who sat by, blank and unreachable, while her children turned to skin and bones. I

try to forgive her for my fathers sake. But to be honest, Im not the forgiving type. Gale spreads the bread slices with the soft goat cheese, carefully placing a basil leaf on each while I strip the bushes of their berries. We settle back in a nook in the rocks. From this place, we are invisible but have a clear view of the valley, which is teeming with summer life, greens to gather, roots to dig, fish iridescent in the sunlight. The day is glorious, with a blue sky and soft breeze. The foods wonderful, with the cheese seeping into the warm bread and the berries bursting in our mouths. Everything would be perfect if this really was a holiday, if all the day off meant was roaming the mountains with Gale, hunting for tonights supper. But instead we have to be standing in the square at two oclock waiting for the names to be called out. We could do it, you know, Gale says quietly. What? I ask. Leave the district. Run off. Live in the woods. You and I, we could make it, says Gale. I dont know how to respond. The idea is so preposterous. If we didnt have so many kids, he adds quickly. Theyre not our kids, of course. But they might as well be. Gales two little brothers and a sister. Prim. And you may as well throw in our mothers, too, because how would they live without us? Who would fill those mouths that are always asking for more? With both of us hunting daily, there are still nights when game has to be swapped for lard or shoelaces or wool, still nights when we go to bed with our stomachs growling. I never want to have kids, I say. I might. If I didnt live here, says Gale. But you do, I say, irritated. Forget it, he snaps back. The conversation feels all wrong. Leave? How could I leave Prim, who is the only person in the world Im certain I love? And Gale is devoted to his family. We cant leave, so why bother talking about it? And even if we did . . . Even if we did . . . Where did this stuff about having kids come from? Theres never been anything romantic between Gale and me. When we met, I was a skinny

twelve-year-old, and although he was only two years older, he already looked like a man. It took a long time for us to even become friends, to stop haggling over every trade and begin helping each other out. Besides, if he wants kids, Gale wont have any trouble finding a wife. Hes good-looking, hes strong enough to handle the work in the mines, and he can hunt. You can tell by the way the girls whisper about him when he walks by in school that they want him. It makes me jealous but not for the reason people would think. Good hunting partners are hard to find. What do you want to do? I ask. We can hunt, fish, or gather. Lets fish at the lake. We can leave our poles and gather in the woods. Get something nice for tonight, he says. Tonight. After the reaping, everyone is supposed to celebrate. And a lot of people do, out of relief that their children have been spared for another year. But at least two families will pull their shutters, lock their doors,

and try to figure out how they will survive the painful weeks to come. We make out well. The predators ignore us on a day when easier, tastier prey abounds. By late morning, we have a dozen fish, a bag of greens and, best of all, a gallon of strawberries. I found the patch a few years ago, but Gale had the idea to string mesh nets around it to keep out the animals. On the way home, we swing by the Hob, the black market that operates in an abandoned warehouse that once held coal. When they came up with a more efficient system that transported the coal directly from the mines to the trains, the Hob gradually took over the space. Most businesses are closed by this time on reaping day, but the black markets still fairly busy. We easily trade six of the fish for good bread, the other two for salt. Greasy Sae, the bony old woman who sells bowls of hot soup from a large kettle, takes half the greens off our hands in exchange for a couple of chunks of paraffin. We might do a tad better elsewhere, but we make an effort to keep on good terms with Greasy Sae. Shes the only one who can consistently be counted on to buy wild dog. We dont hunt them on purpose, but if youre attacked and you take out a dog or two, well, meat is meat. Once its in the soup, Ill call it beef, Greasy Sae says with a wink. No one in the Seam would turn up their nose at a good leg of wild dog, but the Peacekeepers who come to the Hob can afford to be a little choosier. When we finish our business at the market, we go to the back door of the mayors house to sell half the strawberries, knowing he has

a particular fondness for them and can afford our price. The mayors daughter, Madge, opens the door. Shes in my year at school. Being the mayors daughter, youd expect her to be a snob, but shes all right. She just keeps to herself. Like me. Since neither of us really has a group of friends, we seem to end up together a lot at school. Eating lunch, sitting next to each other at assemblies, partnering for sports activities. We rarely talk, which suits us both just fine. Today her drab school outfit has been replaced by an expensive white dress, and her blonde hair is done up with a pink ribbon. Reaping clothes. Pretty dress, says Gale. Madge shoots him a look, trying to see if its a genuine compliment or if hes just being ironic. It is a pretty dress, but she would never be wearing it ordinarily. She presses her lips together and then smiles. Well, if I end up going to the Capitol, I want to look nice, dont I? Now its Gales turn to be confused. Does she mean it? Or is she messing with him? Im guessing the second. You wont be going to the Capitol, says Gale coolly. His eyes land on a small, circular pin that adorns her dress. Real gold. Beautifully crafted. It could keep a family in bread for months. What can you have? Five entries? I had six when I was just twelve years old. Thats not her fault, I say. No, its no ones fault. Just the way it is, says Gale. Madges face has become closed off.

She puts the money for the berries in my hand. Good luck, Katniss. You, too, I say, and the door closes. We walk toward the Seam in silence. I dont like that Gale took a dig at Madge, but hes right, of course. The reaping system is unfair, with the poor getting the worst of it. You become eligible for the reaping the day you turn twelve. That year, your name is entered once. At thirteen, twice. And so on and so on until you reach the age of eighteen, the final year of eligibility, when your name goes into the pool seven times. Thats true for every citizen in all twelve districts in the entire country of Panem. But heres the catch. Say you are poor and starving as we were. You can opt to add your name more times in exchange for tesserae. Each tessera is worth a meager years supply of grain and oil for one person. You may do this for each of your family members as well. So, at the age of twelve, I had my name entered four times. Once, because I had to, and three times for tesserae for grain and oil for myself, Prim, and my mother. In fact, every year I have needed to do this. And the entries are cumulative. So now, at the age of sixteen, my name will be in the

reaping twenty times. Gale, who is eighteen and has been either helping or single-handedly feeding a family of five for seven years, will have his name in forty-two times. You can see why someone like Madge, who has never been at risk of needing a tessera, can set him off. The chance of her name being drawn is very slim compared to those of us who live in the Seam. Not impossible, but slim. And even though the rules were set up by the Capitol, not the districts, certainly not Madges family, its hard not to resent those who dont have to sign up for tesserae. Gale knows his anger at Madge is misdirected. On other days, deep in the woods, Ive listened to him rant about how the tesserae are just another tool to cause misery in our district. A way to plant hatred between the starving workers of the Seam and those who can generally count on supper and thereby ensure we will never trust one another. Its to the Capitols advantage to have us divided among ourselves, he might say if there were no ears to hear but mine. If it wasnt reaping day. If a girl with a gold pin and no tesserae had not made what Im sure she thought was a harmless comment. As we walk, I glance over at Gales face, still smoldering underneath his stony expression. His rages seem pointless to me, although I never say so. Its not that I dont agree with him. I do. But what good is yelling about the Capitol in the middle of the woods? It doesnt change anything. It doesnt make things fair. It doesnt fill our stomachs. In fact, it scares off the nearby game. I let him yell though. Better he does it in the woods than in the district. Gale and I divide our spoils, leaving two fish, a couple of loaves of good bread, greens, a quart of strawberries, salt, paraffin, and a bit of money for each. See you in the square, I say. Wear something

pretty, he says flatly. At home, I find my mother and sister are ready to go. My mother wears a fine dress from her apothecary days. Prim is in my first reaping outfit, a skirt and ruffled blouse. Its a bit big on her, but my mother has made it stay with pins. Even so, shes having trouble keeping the blouse tucked in at the back. A tub of warm water waits for me. I scrub off the dirt and sweat from the woods and even wash my hair. To my surprise, my mother has laid out one of her own lovely dresses for me. A soft blue thing with matching shoes. Are you sure? I ask. Im trying to get past rejecting offers of help from her. For a while, I was so angry, I wouldnt allow her to do anything for me. And this is something special. Her clothes from her

past are very precious to her. Of course. Lets put your hair up, too, she says. I let her towel-dry it and braid it up on my head. I can hardly recognize myself in the cracked mirror that leans against the wall. You look beautiful, says Prim in a hushed voice. And nothing like myself, I say. I hug her, because I know these next few hours will be terrible for her. Her first reaping. Shes about as safe as you can get, since shes only entered once. I wouldnt let her take out any tesserae. But shes worried about me. That the unthinkable might happen. I protect Prim in every way I can, but Im powerless against the reaping. The anguish I always feel when shes in pain wells up in my chest and threatens to register on my (ace. I notice her blouse has pulled out of her skirt in the back again and force myself to stay calm. Tuck your tail in, little duck, I say, smoothing the blouse back in place. Prim giggles and gives me a small Quack. Quack yourself, I say with a light laugh. The kind only Prim can draw out of me. Come on, lets eat, I say and plant a quick kiss on the top of her head. The fish and greens are already cooking in a stew, but that will be for supper. We decide to save the strawberries and bakery bread for this evenings meal, to make it special we say. Instead we drink milk from Prims goat, Lady, and eat the rough bread made from the tessera grain, although no one has much appetite anyway. At one oclock, we head for the square. Attendance is mandatory unless you are on deaths door. This evening, officials will come around and check to see if this is the case. If not, youll be imprisoned. Its too bad, really, that they hold the reaping in the square one of the few places in District 12 that can be pleasant. The squares surrounded by shops, and on public market days, especially if theres good weather, it has a holiday feel to it. But today, despite the bright banners hanging on the buildings, theres an air of grimness. The camera crews, perched like buzzards on rooftops, only add to the effect. People file in silently and sign in. The reaping is a good opportunity for the Capitol to keep tabs on the population as well. Twelve- through eighteen-year-olds are herded into roped areas marked off by ages, the

oldest in the front, the young ones, like Prim, toward the back. Family members line up around the perimeter, holding tightly to one anothers hands. But there are others, too, who have no one they love at stake, or who no longer care, who slip among the crowd, taking bets on the two kids whose names will be drawn. Odds are

given on their ages, whether theyre Seam or merchant, if they will break down and weep. Most refuse dealing with the racketeers but carefully, carefully. These same people tend to be informers, and who hasnt broken the law? I could be shot on a daily basis for hunting, but the appetites of those in charge protect me. Not everyone can claim the same. Anyway, Gale and I agree that if we have to choose between dying of hunger and a bullet in the head, the bullet would be much quicker. The space gets tighter, more claustrophobic as people arrive. The squares quite large, but not enough to hold District 12s population of about eight thousand. Latecomers are directed to the adjacent streets, where they can watch the event on screens as its televised live by the state. I find myself standing in a clump of sixteens from the Seam. We all exchange terse nods then focus our attention on the temporary stage that is set up before the Justice Building. It holds three chairs, a podium, and two large glass balls, one for the boys and one for the girls. I stare at the paper slips in the girls ball. Twenty of them have Katniss Everdeen written on them in careful handwriting. Two of the three chairs fill with Madges father, Mayor Undersee, whos a tall, balding man, and Effie Trinket, District 12s escort, fresh from the Capitol with her scary white grin, pinkish hair, and spring green suit. They murmur to each other and then look with concern at the empty seat. Just as the town clock strikes two, the mayor steps up to the podium and begins to read. Its the same story every year. He tells of the history of Panem, the country that rose up out of the ashes of a place that was once called North America. He lists the disasters, the droughts, the storms, the fires, the encroaching seas that swallowed up so much of the land, the brutal war for what little sustenance remained. The result was Panem, a shining Capitol ringed by thirteen districts, which brought peace and prosperity to its citizens. Then came the Dark Days, the uprising of the districts against the Capitol. Twelve were defeated, the thirteenth obliterated. The Treaty of Treason gave us the new laws to guarantee peace and, as our yearly reminder that the Dark Days must never be repeated, it gave us the Hunger Games. The rules of the Hunger Games are simple. In punishment for the uprising, each of the twelve districts must provide one girl and one boy, called tributes, to participate. The twenty-four tributes will be imprisoned in a vast outdoor arena that could hold anything from a burning desert to a frozen wasteland. Over a period of several weeks, the competitors must fight to the death.

The last tribute standing wins. Taking the kids from our districts, forcing them to kill one another while we watch this is the Capitols way of reminding us how totally we are at their mercy. How little chance we would stand of surviving another rebellion. Whatever words they use, the real message is clear. Look how we take your children and sacrifice them and theres nothing you can do. If you lift a finger, we will destroy every last one of you. Just as we did in District Thirteen. To make it humiliating as well as torturous, the Capitol requires us to treat the Hunger Games as a festivity, a sporting event pitting every district against the others. The last tribute alive receives a life of ease back home, and their district will be showered with prizes, largely consisting of food. All year, the Capitol will show the winning district gifts of grain and oil and even delicacies like sugar while the rest of us battle starvation. It is both a time for repentance and a time for thanks, intones the mayor. Then he reads the list of past District 12 victors. In seventy-four years, we have had exactly two. Only one is still alive. Haymitch Abernathy, a paunchy, middle-aged man, who at this moment appears hollering something unintelligible, staggers onto the stage, and falls into the third chair. Hes drunk. Very. The crowd responds with its token applause, but hes confused and tries to give Effie Trinket a big hug, which she barely manages to fend off. The mayor looks distressed. Since all of this is being televised, right now District 12 is the laughingstock of Panem, and he knows it. He quickly tries to pull the attention back to the reaping by introducing Effie Trinket. Bright and bubbly as ever, Effie Trinket trots to the podium and gives her signature, Happy Hunger Games! And may the odds be ever in your favor! Her pink hair must be a wig because her curls have shifted slightly off-center since her encounter with Haymitch. She goes on a bit about what an honor it is to be here, although everyone knows shes just aching to get bumped up to a better district where they have proper victors, not drunks who molest you in front of the entire nation. Through the crowd, I spot Gale looking back at me with a ghost of a smile. As reapings go, this one at least has a slight entertainment factor. But suddenly I am thinking of Gale and his forty-two names in that big glass ball and how the odds are not in his favor. Not compared to a lot of the boys. And maybe hes thinking the same thing about me because his face darkens and he turns away. But there are still thousands of slips, I wish I could whisper to him. Its time for the drawing. Effie Trinket says as she always does, Ladies first! and crosses to

the glass ball with the girls names. She reaches in, digs her hand deep into the ball, and pulls out a slip of paper. The crowd draws in a collective breath and then you can hear a pin drop, and Im feeling nauseous and so desperately hoping that its not me, that its

not me, that its not me. Effie Trinket crosses back to the podium, smoothes the slip of paper, and reads out the name in a clear voice. And its not me. Its Primrose Everdeen.

2.

One time, when I was in a blind in a tree, waiting motionless for game to wander by, I dozed off and fell ten feet to the ground, landing on my back. It was as if the impact had knocked every wisp of air from my lungs, and I lay there struggling to inhale, to exhale, to do anything. Thats how I feel now, trying to remember how to breathe, unable to speak, totally stunned as the name bounces around the inside of my skull. Someone is gripping my arm, a boy from the Seam, and I think maybe I started to fall and he caught me. There must have been some mistake. This cant be happening. Prim was one slip of paper in thousands! Her chances of being chosen so remote that Id not even bothered to worry about her. Hadnt I done everything? Taken the tesserae, refused to let her do the same? One slip. One slip in thousands. The odds had been entirely in her favor. But it hadnt mattered. Somewhere far away, I can hear the crowd murmuring unhappily as they always do when a twelve-year-old gets chosen because no one thinks this is fair. And then I see her, the blood drained from her face, hands clenched in fists at her sides, walking with stiff, small steps up toward the stage, passing me, and I see the back of her blouse has become untucked and hangs out over her skirt. Its this detail, the untucked blouse forming a ducktail, that brings me back to myself. Prim! The strangled cry comes out of my throat, and my muscles begin to move again. Prim! I dont need to shove through the crowd. The other kids make way immediately allowing me a straight path to the stage. I reach her just as she is about to mount the steps. With one sweep of my arm, I push her behind me. I volunteer! I gasp. I volunteer as tribute! Theres some confusion on the stage.

District 12 hasnt had a volunteer in decades and the protocol has become rusty. The rule is that once a tributes name has been pulled from the ball, another eligible boy, if a boys name has been read, or girl, if a girls name has been read, can step forward to take his or her place. In some districts, in which winning the reaping is such a great honor, people are eager to risk their lives, the volunteering is complicated. But in District 12, where the word tribute is pretty much synonymous with the word corpse, volunteers are all but extinct. Lovely! says Effie Trinket. But I believe theres a small matter of introducing the reaping winner and then asking for volunteers, and if one does come forth then we, um . . . She trails off, unsure herself. What does it matter? says the mayor. Hes looking at me with a pained expression on his face. He doesnt know me really, but theres a faint recognition there. I am the girl who brings the strawberries. The girl his daughter might have spoken of on occasion. The girl who five years ago stood huddled with her mother and

sister, as he presented her, the oldest child, with a medal of valor. A medal for her father, vaporized in the mines. Does he remember that? What does it matter? he repeats gruffly. Let her come forward. Prim is screaming hysterically behind me. Shes wrapped her skinny arms around me like a vice. No, Katniss! No! You cant go! Prim, let go, I say harshly, because this is upsetting me and I dont want to cry. When they televise the replay of the reapings tonight, everyone will make note of my tears, and Ill be marked as an easy target. A weakling. I will give no one that satisfaction. Let go! I can feel someone pulling her from my back. I turn and see Gale has lifted Prim off the ground and shes thrashing in his arms. Up you go, Catnip, he says, in a voice hes fighting to keep steady, and then he carries Prim off toward my mother. I steel myself and climb the steps. Well, bravo! gushes Effie Trinket. Thats the spirit of the Games! Shes pleased to finally have a district with a little action going on in it. Whats your name? I swallow hard. Katniss Everdeen, I say. I bet my buttons that was your sister. Dont want her to steal all the glory, do we? Come on, everybody! Lets give a big round of applause to our newest tribute! trills Effie Trinket. To the everlasting credit of the people of District 12, not one person claps. Not even the ones holding betting slips, the ones who are usually beyond caring. Possibly because they know me from the Hob, or knew my father, or have encountered Prim, who no

one can help loving. So instead of acknowledging applause, I stand there unmoving while they take part in the boldest form of dissent they can manage. Silence. Which says we do not agree. We do not condone. All of this is wrong. Then something unexpected happens. At least, I dont expect it because I dont think of District 12 as a place that cares about me. But a shift has occurred since I stepped up to take Prims place, and now it seems I have become someone precious. At first one, then another, then almost every member of the crowd touches the three middle fingers of their left hand to their lips and holds it out to me. It is an old and rarely used gesture of our district, occasionally seen at funerals. It means thanks, it means admiration, it means good-bye to someone you love. Now I am truly in danger of crying, but fortunately Haymitch chooses this time to come staggering across the stage to congratulate me. Look at her. Look at this one! he hollers, throwing an arm around my shoulders. Hes surprisingly strong for such a wreck. I like her! His breath reeks of liquor and its been a long time since hes bathed. Lots of . . . He cant think of the word for a while. Spunk! he says triumphantly. More than you! he releases me and starts for the front of the stage. More than you! he shouts, pointing directly into a

camera. Is he addressing the audience or is he so drunk he might actually be taunting the Capitol? Ill never know because just as hes opening his mouth

to continue, Haymitch plummets off the stage and knocks himself unconscious. Hes disgusting, but Im grateful. With every camera gleefully trained on him, I have just enough time to release the small, choked sound in my throat and compose myself. I put my hands behind my back and stare into the distance. I can see the hills I climbed this morning with Gale. For a moment, I yearn for something . . . The idea of us leaving the district . . . Making our way in the woods . . . But I know I was right about not running off. Because who else would have volunteered for Prim? Haymitch is whisked away on a stretcher, and Effie Trinket is trying to get the ball rolling again. What an exciting day! she warbles as she attempts to straighten her wig, which has listed severely to the right. But more excitement to come! Its time to choose our boy tribute! Clearly hoping to contain her tenuous hair situation, she plants one hand on her head as she crosses to the ball that contains the boys names and grabs the first slip she encounters. She zips back to the podium, and I dont even have time to wish

for Gales safety when shes reading the name. Peeta Mellark. Peeta Mellark! Oh, no, I think. Not him. Because I recognize this name, although I have never spoken directly to its owner. Peeta Mellark. No, the odds are not in my favor today. I watch him as he makes his way toward the stage. Medium height, stocky build, ashy blond hair that falls in waves over his forehead. The shock of the moment is registering on his face, you can see his struggle to remain emotionless, but his blue eyes show the alarm Ive seen so often in prey. Yet he climbs steadily onto the stage and takes his place. Effie Trinket asks for volunteers, but no one steps forward. He has two older brothers, I know, Ive seen them in the bakery, but one is probably too old now to volunteer and the other wont. This is standard. Family devotion only goes so far for most people on reaping day. What I did was the radical thing. The mayor begins to read the long, dull Treaty of Treason as he does every year at this point its required but Im not listening to a word. Why him? I think. Then I try to convince myself it doesnt matter. Peeta Mellark and I are not friends. Not even neighbors. We dont speak. Our only real interaction happened years ago. Hes probably forgotten it. But I havent and I know I never will. . . . It was during the worst time. My father had been

killed in the mine accident three months earlier in the bitterest January anyone could remember. The numbness of his loss had passed, and the pain would hit me out of nowhere, doubling me over, racking my body with sobs. Where are you? I would cry out in my mind. Where have you gone? Of course, there was never any answer. The district had given us a small amount of money as compensation for his death, enough to cover one month of grieving at which time my mother would be expected to get a job. Only she didnt. She didnt do anything but sit propped up in a

chair or, more often, huddled under the blankets on her bed, eyes fixed on some point in the distance. Once in a while, shed stir, get up as if moved by some urgent purpose, only to then collapse back into stillness. No amount of pleading from Prim seemed to affect her. I was terrified. I suppose now that my mother was locked in some dark world of sadness, but at the time, all I knew was that I had lost not only a father, but a mother as well. At eleven years old, with Prim just seven, I took over as head of the family. There was no choice. I bought our food at the market and cooked it as best I could and tried to keep Prim and myself looking presentable.

Because if it had become known that my mother could no longer care for us, the district would have taken us away from her and placed us in the community home. Id grown up seeing those home kids at school. The sadness, the marks of angry hands on their faces, the hopelessness that curled their shoulders forward. I could never let that happen to Prim. Sweet, tiny Prim who cried when I cried before she even knew the reason, who brushed and plaited my mothers hair before we left for school, who still polished my fathers shaving mirror each night because hed hated the layer of coal dust that settled on everything in the Seam. The community home would crush her like a bug. So I kept our predicament a secret. But the money ran out and we were slowly starving to death. Theres no other way to put it. I kept telling myself if I could only hold out until May, just May 8th, I would turn twelve and be able to sign up for the tesserae and get that precious grain and oil to feed us. Only there were still several weeks to go. We could well be dead by then. Starvations not an uncommon fate in District 12. Who hasnt seen the victims? Older people who cant work. Children from a family with too many to feed. Those injured in the mines. Straggling through the streets. And one day, you come upon them sitting motionless against a wall or

lying in the Meadow, you hear the wails from a house, and the Peacekeepers are called in to retrieve the body. Starvation is never the cause of death officially. Its always the flu, or exposure, or pneumonia. But that fools no one. On the afternoon of my encounter with Peeta Mellark, the rain was falling in relentless icy sheets. I had been in town, trying to trade some threadbare old baby clothes of Prims in the public market, but there were no takers. Although I had been to the Hob on several occasions with my father, I was too frightened to venture into that rough, gritty place alone. The rain had soaked through my fathers hunting jacket, leaving me chilled to the bone. For three days, wed had nothing but boiled water with some old dried mint leaves Id found in the back of a cupboard. By the time the market closed, I was shaking so hard I dropped my bundle of baby clothes in a mud puddle. I didnt pick it up for fear I would keel over and be unable to regain my feet. Besides, no one

wanted those clothes. I couldnt go home. Because at home was my mother with her dead eyes and my little sister, with her hollow cheeks and cracked lips. I couldnt walk into that room with the smoky fire from the damp branches I had scavenged at

the edge of the woods after the coal had run out, my bands empty of any hope. I found myself stumbling along a muddy lane behind the shops that serve the wealthiest townspeople. The merchants live above their businesses, so I was essentially in their backyards. I remember the outlines of garden beds not yet planted for the spring, a goat or two in a pen, one sodden dog tied to a post, hunched defeated in the muck. All forms of stealing are forbidden in District 12. Punishable by death. But it crossed my mind that there might be something in the trash bins, and those were fair game. Perhaps a bone at the butchers or rotted vegetables at the grocers, something no one but my family was desperate enough to eat. Unfortunately, the bins had just been emptied. When I passed the bakers, the smell of fresh bread was so overwhelming I felt dizzy. The ovens were in the back, and a golden glow spilled out the open kitchen door. I stood mesmerized by the heat and the luscious scent until the rain interfered, running its icy fingers down my back, forcing me back to life. I lifted the lid to the bakers trash bin and found it spotlessly, heartlessly bare. Suddenly a voice was screaming at me and I looked up to see the bakers wife, telling me to move on and did I want her to call the Peacekeepers and

how sick she was of having those brats from the Seam pawing through her trash. The words were ugly and I had no defense. As I carefully replaced the lid and backed away, I noticed him, a boy with blond hair peering out from behind his mothers back. Id seen him at school. He was in my year, but I didnt know his name. He stuck with the town kids, so how would I? His mother went back into the bakery, grumbling, but he must have been watching me as I made my way behind the pen that held their pig and leaned against the far side of an old apple tree. The realization that Id have nothing to take home had finally sunk in. My knees buckled and I slid down the tree trunk to its roots. It was too much. I was too sick and weak and tired, oh, so tired. Let them call the Peacekeepers and take us to the community home, I thought. Or better yet, let me die right here in the rain. There was a clatter in the bakery and I heard the woman screaming again and the sound of a blow, and I vaguely wondered what was going on. Feet sloshed toward me through the mud and I thought, Its her. Shes coming to drive me away with a stick. But it wasnt her. It was the boy. In his arms, he carried two large loaves of bread that must have fallen into the fire because the crusts were scorched black. His mother was yelling, Feed it to the pig, you stupid creature!

Why not? No one decent will buy burned bread! He began to tear off chunks from the burned parts and

toss them into the trough, and the front bakery bell rung and the mother disappeared to help a customer. The boy never even glanced my way, but I was watching him. Because of the bread, because of the red weal that stood out on his cheekbone. What had she hit him with? My parents never hit us. I couldnt even imagine it. The boy took one look back to the bakery as if checking that the coast was clear, then, his attention back on the pig, he threw a loaf of bread in my direction. The second quickly followed, and he sloshed back to the bakery, closing the kitchen door tightly behind him. I stared at the loaves in disbelief. They were fine, perfect really, except for the burned areas. Did he mean for me to have them? He must have. Because there they were at my feet. Before anyone could witness what had happened I shoved the loaves up under my shirt, wrapped the hunting jacket tightly about me, and walked swiftly away. The heat of the bread burned into my skin, but I clutched it tighter, clinging to life. By the time I reached home, the loaves had cooled somewhat,

but the insides were still warm. When I dropped them on the table, Prims hands reached to tear off a chunk, but I made her sit, forced my mother to join us at the table, and poured warm tea. I scraped off the black stuff and sliced the bread. We ate an entire loaf, slice by slice. It was good hearty bread, filled with raisins and nuts. I put my clothes to dry at the fire, crawled into bed, and fell into a dreamless sleep. It didnt occur to me until the next morning that the boy might have burned the bread on purpose. Might have dropped the loaves into the flames, knowing it meant being punished, and then delivered them to me. But I dismissed this. It must have been an accident. Why would he have done it? He didnt even know me. Still, just throwing me the bread was an enormous kindness that would have surely resulted in a beating if discovered. 1 couldnt explain his actions. We ate slices of bread for breakfast and headed to school. It was as if spring had come overnight. Warm sweet air. Fluffy clouds. At school, I passed the boy in the hall, his cheek had swelled up and his eye had blackened. He was with his friends and didnt acknowledge me in any way. But as I collected Prim and started for home that afternoon, I found him staring at me from across the school yard. Our eyes met for only a second, then he turned his head

away. I dropped my gaze, embarrassed, and thats when I saw it. The first dandelion of the year. A bell went off in my head. I thought of the hours spent in the woods with my father and I knew how we were going to survive. To this day, I can never shake the connection between this boy, Peeta Mellark, and the bread that gave me hope, and the dandelion that reminded me that I was not doomed. And more than once, I have turned in the school hallway and caught his eyes trained on me, only to quickly flit away. I feel like I owe him something, and I hate owing people. Maybe if I

had thanked him at some point, Id be feeling less conflicted now. I thought about it a couple of times, but the opportunity never seemed to present itself. And now it never will. Because were going to be thrown into an arena to fight to the death. Exactly how am I supposed to work in a thank-you in there? Somehow it just wont seem sincere if Im trying to slit his throat. The mayor finishes the dreary Treaty of Treason and motions for Peeta and me to shake hands. His are as solid and warm as those loaves of bread. Peeta looks me right in the eye and gives my hand what I think is meant to be a reassuring squeeze. Maybe its just a nervous spasm. We turn back to

face the crowd as the anthem of Panem plays. Oh, well, I think. There will be twenty-four of us. Odds are someone else will kill him before I do. Of course, the odds have not been very dependable of late.

3.

The moment the anthem ends, we are taken into custody. I dont mean were handcuffed or anything, but a group of Peacekeepers marches us through the front door of the Justice Building. Maybe tributes have tried to escape in the past. Ive never seen that happen though. Once inside, Im conducted to a room and left alone. Its the richest place Ive ever been in, with thick, deep carpets and a velvet couch and chairs. I know velvet because my mother has a dress with a collar made of the stuff. When I sit on the couch, I cant help running my fingers over the fabric repeatedly. It helps to calm me as I try to prepare for the next hour. The time allotted for the tributes to say goodbye to their loved ones. I cannot afford to get upset, to leave this room with puffy eyes and a red nose. Crying is not an option. There will be more

cameras at the train station. My sister and my mother come first. I reach out to Primand she climbs on my lap, her arms around my neck, headon my shoulder, just like she did when she was a toddler. My mother sits beside me and wraps her arms around us. For a few minutes, we say nothing. Then I start telling themall the things they must remember to do, now that I will not be there to do them for them. Prim is not to take any tesserae. They can get by, iftheyre careful, on selling Prims goat milk and cheese and the small apothecary business my mother now runs for the people in the Seam. Gale will get her the herbs she doesnt grow herself, but she must be very careful to describe them because hes not as familiar with them as I am. Hell also bring them game he and I made a pact about this a year or so ago and will probably not ask for compensation, but they should thank him with some kind of trade, like milk or medicine. I dont bother suggesting Prim learn to hunt. I tried to teach her a couple of times and it was disastrous. The woods terrified her, and whenever I shot something, shed get teary and talk about how we might be able to heal it if we got it home soon enough. But she makes out well with her goat, so I concentrate on that. When I am done with instructions about fuel,


and trading, and staying in school, I turn to my mother and grip her arm, hard. Listen to me. Are you listening to me? She nods, alarmed by my intensity. She must know whats coming. You cant leave again, I say. My mothers eyes find the floor. I know. I wont. I couldnt help what Well, you have to help it this time. You cant clock out and leave Prim on her own. Theres no me now to keep you both alive. It doesnt matter what happens. Whatever you see on the screen. You have to promise me youll fight through it! My voice has risen to a shout. In it is all the anger, all the fear I felt at her abandonment. She pulls her arm from my grasp, moved to anger herself now. I was ill. I could have treated myself if Id had the medicine I have now. That part about her being ill might be true. Ive seen her bring back people suffering from immobilizing sadness since. Perhaps it is a sickness, but its one we cant afford. Then take it. And take care of her! I say. Ill be all right, Katniss, says Prim, clasping my face in her hands. But you have to take care, too. Youre so fast and brave. Maybe you can win. I cant win. Prim must know that in her heart. The competition will be far beyond my abilities. Kids from wealthier districts, where winning is a huge honor, whove been trained their whole lives for this. Boys who are two to three times my size. Girls

who know twenty different ways to kill you with a knife. Oh, therell be people like me, too. People to weed out before the real fun begins. Maybe, I say, because I can hardly tell my mother to carry on if Ive already given up myself. Besides, it isnt in my nature to go down without a fight, even when things seem insurmountable. Then wed be rich as Haymitch. I dont care if were rich. I just want you to come home. You will try, wont you? Really, really try? asks Prim. Really, really try. I swear it, I say. And I know, because of Prim, Ill have to. And then the Peacekeeper is at the door, signaling our time is up, and were all hugging one another so hard it hurts and all Im saying is I love you. I love you both. And theyre saying it back and then the Peacekeeper orders them out and the door closes. I bury my head in one of the velvet pillows as if this can block the whole thing out. Someone else enters the room, and when I look up, Im surprised to see its the baker, Peeta Mellarks father. I cant believe hes come to visit me. After all, Ill be trying to kill his son soon. But we do know each other a bit, and he knows Prim even better. When she sells her goat cheeses at the Hob, she puts two of them aside for him and he gives her a generous amount of bread in return. We always wait to trade with him when his witch of a wife

isnt around because hes so much nicer. I feel certain he would never have hit his son the way she did over the burned bread. But why has he come to see me? The baker sits awkwardly on the edge of one of the plush chairs. Hes a big, broad-shouldered man with burn scars from years at the ovens. He must

have just said goodbye to his son. He pulls a white paper package from his jacket pocket and holds it out to me. I open it and find cookies. These are a luxury we can never afford. Thank you, I say. The bakers not a very talkative man in the best of times, and today he has no words at all. I had some of your bread this morning. My friend Gale gave you a squirrel for it. He nods, as if remembering the squirrel. Not your best trade, I say. He shrugs as if it couldnt possibly matter. Then I cant think of anything else, so we sit in silence until a Peacemaker summons him. He rises and coughs to clear his throat. Ill keep an eye on the little girl. Make sure shes eating. I feel some of the pressure in my chest lighten at his words. People deal with me, but they are genuinely fond of Prim. Maybe there will be enough fondness to keep her alive. My next guest is also unexpected. Madge walks straight to me. She is not weepy

or evasive, instead theres an urgency about her tone that surprises me. They let you wear one thing from your district in the arena. One thing to remind you of home. Will you wear this? She holds out the circular gold pin that was on her dress earlier. I hadnt paid much attention to it before, but now I see its a small bird in flight. Your pin? I say. Wearing a token from my district is about the last thing on my mind. Here, Ill put it on your dress, all right? Madge doesnt wait for an answer, she just leans in and fixes the bird to my dress. Promise youll wear it into the arena, Katniss? she asks. Promise? Yes, I say. Cookies. A pin. Im getting all kinds of gifts today. Madge gives me one more. A kiss on the cheek. Then shes gone and Im left thinking that maybe Madge really has been my friend all along. Finally, Gale is here and maybe there is nothing romantic between us, but when he opens his arms I dont hesitate to go into them. His body is familiar to me the way it moves, the smell of wood smoke, even the sound of his heart beating I know from quiet moments on a hunt but this is the first time I really feel it, lean and hard-muscled against my own. Listen, he says. Getting a knife should be pretty easy, but youve got to get your hands on a bow. Thats your best chance. They dont always have bows, I say, thinking of the

year there were only horrible spiked maces that the tributes had to bludgeon one another to death with. Then make one, says Gale. Even a weak bow is better than no bow at all. I have tried copying my fathers bows with poor results. Its not that easy. Even he had to scrap his own work sometimes. I dont even know if therell be wood, I say. Another year, they tossed everybody into a landscape of nothing but boulders and sand and scruffy bushes. I particularly hated that year. Many contestants were bitten by venomous snakes or went insane from thirst. Theres almost always some wood, Gale says. Since that year half of them died of cold. Not much entertainment in that. Its true. We spent one Hunger Games watching the

players freeze to death at night. You could hardly see them because they were just huddled in balls and had no wood for fires or torches or anything. It was considered very anti-climactic in the Capitol, all those quiet, bloodless deaths. Since then, theres usually been wood to make fires. Yes, theres usually some, I say. Katniss, its just hunting. Youre the best hunter I know, says Gale. Its not just hunting. Theyre armed. They think, I say. So do you. And youve had more practice. Real

practice, he says. You know how to kill. Not people, I say. How different can it be, really? says Gale grimly. The awful thing is that if I can forget theyre people, it will be no different at all. The Peacekeepers are back too soon and Gale asks for more time, but theyre taking him away and I start to panic. Dont let them starve! I cry out, clinging to his hand. I wont! You know I wont! Katniss, remember I he says, and they yank us apart and slam the door and Ill never know what it was he wanted me to remember. Its a short ride from the Justice Building to the train station. Ive never been in a car before. Rarely even ridden in wagons. In the Seam, we travel on foot. Ive been right not to cry. The station is swarming with reporters with their insectlike cameras trained directly on my face. But Ive had a lot of practice at wiping my face clean of emotions and I do this now. I catch a glimpse of myself on the television screen on the wall thats airing my arrival live and feel gratified that I appear almost bored. Peeta Mellark, on the other hand, has obviously been crying and interestingly enough does not seem to be trying to cover it up. I immediately wonder if this will be his strategy in the Games. To appear weak and frightened, to reassure the other tributes that he is no competition at all, and then come out fighting. This worked very

well for a girl, Johanna Mason, from District 7 a few years back. She seemed like such a sniveling, cowardly fool that no one bothered about her until there were only a handful of contestants left. It turned out she could kill viciously. Pretty clever, the way she played it. But this seems an odd strategy for Peeta Mellark because hes a bakers son. All those years of having enough to eat and hauling bread trays around have made him broad-shouldered and strong. It will take an awful lot of weeping to convince anyone to overlook him. We have to stand for a few minutes in the doorway of the train while the cameras gobble up our images, then were allowed inside and the doors close mercifully behind us. The train begins to move at once. The speed initially takes my breath away. Of course, Ive never been on a train, as travel between the districts is forbidden except for officially sanctioned duties. For us, thats mainly transporting coal. But this is no ordinary coal train. Its one of the high-speed Capitol models that average 250 miles per hour. Our journey to the Capitol will take less than a day. In school, they tell us the Capitol

was built in a place once called the Rockies. District 12 was in a region known is

Appalachia. Even hundreds of years ago, they mined coal here. Which is why our miners have to dig so deep. Somehow it all comes back to coal at school. Besides basic reading and math most of our instruction is coal-related. Except for the weekly lecture on the history of Panem. Its mostly a lot of blather about what we owe the Capitol. I know there must be more than theyre telling us, an actual account of what happened during the rebellion. But I dont spend much time thinking about it. Whatever the truth is, I dont see how it will help me get food on the table. The tribute train is fancier than even the room in the Justice Building. We are each given our own chambers that have a bedroom, a dressing area, and a private bathroom with hot and cold running water. We dont have hot water at home, unless we boil it. There are drawers filled with fine clothes, and Effie Trinket tells me to do anything I want, wear anything I want, everything is at my disposal. Just be ready for supper in an hour. I peel off my mothers blue dress and take a hot shower. Ive never had a shower before. Its like being in a summer rain, only warmer. I dress in a dark green shirt and pants. At the last minute, I remember Madges little gold pin. For the first time, I get a good look at it. Its as if someone fashioned a small golden bird and then attached a ring

around it. The bird is connected to the ring only by its wing tips. I suddenly recognize it. A mocking jay. Theyre funny birds and something of a slap in the face to the Capitol. During the rebellion, the Capitol bred a series of genetically altered animals as weapons. The common term for them was muttations, or sometimes mutts for short. One was a special bird called a jabber jay that had the ability to memorize and repeat whole human conversations. They were homing birds, exclusively male, that were released into regions where the Capitols enemies were known to be hiding. After the birds gathered words, theyd fly back to centers to be recorded. It took people awhile to realize what was going on in the districts, how private conversations were being transmitted. Then, of course, the rebels fed the Capitol endless lies, and the joke was on it. So the centers were shut down and the birds were abandoned to die off in the wild. Only they didnt die off. Instead, the jabber jays mated with female mockingbirds creating a whole new species that could replicate both bird whistles and human melodies. They had lost the ability to enunciate words but could still mimic a range of human vocal sounds, from a childs high-pitched warble to a mans deep tones. And they could re-create songs. Not just a few notes, but whole songs

with multiple verses, if you had the patience to sing them and if they liked your voice. My father was particularly fond of mockingjays. When we went hunting, he would whistle or sing complicated songs to them and, after a polite

pause, theyd always sing back. Not everyone is treated with such respect. But whenever my father sang, all the birds in the area would fall silent and listen. His voice was that beautiful, high and clear and so filled with life it made you want to laugh and cry at the same time. I could never bring myself to continue the practice after he was gone. Still, theres something comforting about the little bird. Its like having a piece of my father with me, protecting me. I fasten the pin onto my shirt, and with the dark green fabric as a background, I can almost imagine the mockingjay flying through the trees. Effie Trinket comes to collect me for supper. I follow her through the narrow, rocking corridor into a dining room with polished paneled walls. Theres a table where all the dishes are highly breakable. Peeta Mellark sits waiting for us, the chair next to him empty. Wheres Haymitch? asks Effie Trinket brightly. Last time I saw him, he said he was going to take a nap, says Peeta. Well, its been an

exhausting day, says Effie Trinket. I think shes relieved by Haymitchs absence, and who can blame her? The supper comes in courses. A thick carrot soup, green salad, lamb chops and mashed potatoes, cheese and fruit, a chocolate cake. Throughout the meal, Effie Trinket keeps reminding us to save space because theres more to come. But Im stuffing myself because Ive never had food like this, so good and so much, and because probably the best thing I can do between now and the Games is put on a few pounds. At least, you two have decent manners, says Effie as were finishing the main course. The pair last year ate everything with their hands like a couple of savages. It completely upset my digestion. The pair last year were two kids from the Seam whod never, not one day of their lives, had enough to eat. And when they did have food, table manners were surely the last thing on their minds. Peetas a bakers son. My mother taught Prim and I to eat properly, so yes, I can handle a fork and knife. But I hate Effie Trinkets comment so much I make a point of eating the rest of my meal with my fingers. Then I wipe my hands on the tablecloth. This makes her purse her lips tightly together. Now that the meals over, Im fighting to keep the food down. I can see Peetas looking a little green, too. Neither of our

stomachs is used to such rich fare. But if I can hold down Greasy Saes concoction of mice meat, pig entrails, and tree bark a winter specialty Im determined to hang on to this. We go to another compartment to watch the recap of the reapings across Panem. They try to stagger them throughout the day so a person could conceivably watch the whole thing live, but only people in the Capitol could really do that, since none of them have to attend reapings themselves. One by one, we see the other reapings, the names called, (the volunteers stepping forward or, more often, not. We examine the faces of the kids who will be our competition. A few stand out in my mind. A

monstrous boy who lunges forward to volunteer from District 2. A fox-faced girl with sleek red hair from District 5. A boy with a crippled foot from District 10. And most hauntingly, a twelve-year-old girl from District 11. She has dark brown skin and eyes, but other than that, shes very like Prim in size and demeanor. Only when she mounts the stage and they ask for volunteers, all you can hear is the wind whistling through the decrepit buildings around her. Theres no one willing to take her place. Last of all, they show District 12. Prim being called, me running forward to

volunteer. You cant miss the desperation in my voice as I shove Prim behind me, as if Im afraid no one will hear and theyll take Prim away. But, of course, they do hear. I see Gale pulling her off me and watch myself mount the stage. The commentators are not sure what to say about the crowds refusal to applaud. The silent salute. One says that District 12 has always been a bit backward but that local customs can be charming. As if on cue, Haymitch falls off the stage, and they groan comically. Peetas name is drawn, and he quietly takes his place. We shake hands. They cut to the anthem again, and the pro-gram ends. Effie Trinket is disgruntled about the state her wig was in. Your mentor has a lot to learn about presentation. A lot about televised behavior. Peeta unexpectedly laughs. He was drunk, says Peeta. Hes drunk every year. Every day, I add. I cant help smirking a little. Effie Trinket makes it sound like Haymitch just has somewhat rough manners that could be corrected with a few tips from her. Yes, hisses Effie Trinket. How odd you two find it amusing. You know your mentor is your lifeline to the world in these Games. The one who advises you, lines up your sponsors, and dictates the presentation of any gifts. Haymitch can well be the difference between your life and your death! Just then,

Haymitch staggers into the compartment. I miss supper? he says in a slurred voice. Then he vomits all over the expensive carpet and falls in the mess. So laugh away! says Effie Trinket. She hops in her pointy shoes around the pool of vomit and flees the room.

4.

For a few moments, Peeta and I take in the scene of our mentor trying to rise out of the slippery vile stuff from his stomach. The reek of vomit and raw spirits almost brings my dinner up. We exchange a glance. Obviously Haymitch isnt much, but Effie Trinket is right about one thing, once were in the arena hes all weve got. As if by some unspoken agreement, Peeta and I each take one of Haymitchs arms and help him to his feet. I tripped? Haymitch asks. Smells bad. He wipes his hand on his nose, smearing his face with vomit. Lets get you back to your room, says Peeta. Clean you up a bit. We half-lead half-carry Haymitch back to his compartment. Since we cant exactly set him down on the embroidered bedspread, we haul him into the bathtub

and turn the shower on him. He hardly notices. Its okay, Peeta says to me. Ill take it from here. I cant

help feeling a little grateful since the last thing I want to do is strip down Haymitch, wash the vomit out of his chest hair, and tuck him into bed. Possibly Peeta is trying to make a good impression on him, to be his favorite once the Games begin. But judging by the state hes in, Haymitch will have no memory of this tomorrow. All right, I say. I can send one of the Capitol people to help you. Theres any number on the train. Cooking for us. Waiting on us. Guarding us. Taking care of us is their job. No. I dont want them, says Peeta. I nod and head to my own room. I understand how Peeta feels. I cant stand the sight of the Capitol people myself. But making them deal with Haymitch might be a small form of revenge. So Im pondering the reason why he insists on taking care of Haymitch and all of a sudden I think, Its because hes being kind. Just as he was kind to give me the bread. The idea pulls me up short. A kind Peeta Mellark is far more dangerous to me than an unkind one. Kind people have a way of working their way inside me and rooting there. And I cant let Peeta do this.

Not where were going. So I decide, from this moment on, to have as little as possible to do with the bakers son. When I get back to my room, the train is pausing at a platform to refuel. I quickly open the window, toss the cookies Peetas father gave me out of the train, and slam the glass shut. No more. No more of either of them. Unfortunately, the packet of cookies hits the ground and bursts open in a patch of dandelions by the track. I only see the image for a moment, because the train is off again, but its enough. Enough to remind me of that other dandelion in the school yard years ago . . . I had just turned away from Peeta Mellarks bruised face when I saw the dandelion and I knew hope wasnt lost. I plucked it carefully and hurried home. I grabbed a bucket and Prims hand and headed to the Meadow and yes, it was dotted with the golden-headed weeds. After wed harvested those, we scrounged along inside the fence for probably a mile until wed filled the bucket with the dandelion greens, stems, and flowers. That night, we gorged ourselves on dandelion salad and the rest of the bakery bread. What else? Prim asked me. What other food can we find? All kinds of things, I promised her. I just have to remember them. My mother had a book shed brought with her from the apothecary shop. The pages were

made of old parchment and covered in ink drawings of plants. Neat handwritten blocks told their names, where to gather them, when they came in bloom, their medical uses. But my father added other entries to the book. Plants for eating, not healing. Dandelions, pokeweed, wild onions, pines. Prim and I spent the rest of the night poring over those pages. The next day, we were off school. For a while I hung around the edges of the Meadow, but finally I worked up the courage to go under the fence. It was the first time Id been there alone, without my fathers weapons to protect me. But I

retrieved the small bow and arrows hed made me from a hollow tree. I probably didnt go more than twenty yards into the woods that day. Most of the time, I perched up in the branches of an old oak, hoping for game to come by. After several hours, I had the good luck to kill a rabbit. Id shot a few rabbits before, with my fathers guidance. But this Id done on my own. We hadnt had meat in months. The sight of the rabbit seemed to stir something in my mother. She roused herself, skinned the carcass, and made a stew with the meat and some more greens Prim had

gathered. Then she acted confused and went back to bed, but when the stew was done, we made her eat a bowl. The woods became our savior, and each day I went a bit farther into its arms. It was slow-going at first, but I was determined to feed us. I stole eggs from nests, caught fish in nets, sometimes managed to shoot a squirrel or rabbit for stew, and gathered the various plants that sprung up beneath my feet. Plants are tricky. Many are edible, but one false mouthful and youre dead. I checked and double-checked the plants I harvested with my fathers pictures. I kept us alive. Any sign of danger, a distant howl, the inexplicable break of a branch, sent me flying back to the fence at first. Then I began to risk climbing trees to escape the wild dogs that quickly got bored and moved on. Bears and cats lived deeper in, perhaps disliking the sooty reek of our district. On May 8th, I went to the Justice Building, signed up for my tesserae, and pulled home my first batch of grain and oil in Prims toy wagon. On the eighth of every month, I was entitled to do the same. I couldnt stop hunting and gathering, of course. The grain was not enough to live on, and there were other things to buy, soap and milk and thread. What we didnt absolutely have to eat, I began to trade at the Hob. It was frightening to enter that place without my

father at my side, but people had respected him, and they accepted me. Game was game after all, no matter whod shot it. I also sold at the back doors of the wealthier clients in town, trying to remember what my father had told me and learning a few new tricks as well. The butcher would buy my rabbits but not squirrels. The baker enjoyed squirrel but would only trade for one if his wife wasnt around. The Head Peacekeeper loved wild turkey. The mayor had a passion for strawberries. In late summer, I was washing up in a pond when I noticed the plants growing around me. Tall with leaves like arrowheads. Blossoms with three white petals. I knelt down in the water, my fingers digging into the soft mud, and I pulled up handfuls of the roots. Small, bluish tubers that dont look like much but boiled or baked are as good as any potato. Katniss, I said aloud. Its the plant I was named for. And I heard my fathers voice joking, As long as you can find yourself, youll never starve. I spent hours stirring up the pond bed with my toes and a stick, gathering the tubers that floated to the top.

That night, we feasted on fish and Katniss roots until we were all, for the first

time in months, full. Slowly, my mother returned to us. She began to clean and cook and preserve some of the food I brought in for winter. People traded us or paid money for her medical remedies. One day, I heard her singing. Prim was thrilled to have her back, but I kept watching, waiting for her to disappear on us again. I didnt trust her. And some small gnarled place inside me hated her for her weakness, for her neglect, for the months she had put us through. Prim forgave her, but I had taken a step back from my mother, put up a wall to protect myself from needing her, and nothing was ever the same between us again. Now I was going to die without that ever being set right. I thought of how I had yelled at her today in the Justice Building. I had told her I loved her, too, though. So maybe it would all balance out. For a while I stand staring out the train window, wishing I could open it again, but unsure of what would happen at such high speed. In the distance, I see the lights of another district. 7? 10? I dont know. I think about the people in their houses, settling in for bed. I imagine my home, with its shutters drawn tight. What are they doing now, my mother and Prim? Were they able to eat supper? The fish stew and the strawberries? Or did it lay untouched on their plates? Did they watch the recap of the days events on the battered old TV that sits on the table against the wall? Surely, there were more tears. Is my mother holding up, being strong for Prim? Or has she already started to slip away, leaving the weight of the world on my sisters fragile shoulders? Prim will undoubtedly sleep with my mother tonight. The thought of that scruffy old Buttercup posting himself on the bed to watch over Prim comforts me. If she cries, he will nose his way into her arms and curl up there until she calms down and falls asleep. Im so glad I didnt drown him. Imagining my home makes me ache with loneliness. This day has been endless. Could Gale and I have been eating blackberries only this morning? It seems like a lifetime ago. Like a long dream that deteriorated into a nightmare. Maybe, if I go to sleep, I will wake up back in District 12, where I belong. Probably the drawers hold any number of nightgowns, but I just strip off my shirt and pants and climb into bed in my underwear. The sheets are made of soft, silky fabric. A thick fluffy comforter gives immediate warmth. If Im going to cry, now is the time to do it. By morning, Ill be able to wash the damage done by the tears from my face. But no tears come. Im too tired or too numb to cry. The only thing I feel is a desire to be somewhere else. So I let the train rock me into oblivion. Gray light is leaking through

the curtains when the rapping rouses me. I hear Effie Trinkets voice, calling me to rise. Up, up, up! Its going to be a big, big, big day! I try and imagine, for a moment, what it must be like inside that

womans head. What thoughts fill her waking hours? What dreams come to her at night? I have no idea. I put the green outfit back on since its not really dirty, just slightly crumpled from spending the night on the floor. My fingers trace the circle around the little gold mockingjay and I think of the woods, and of my father, and of my mother and Prim waking up, having to get on with things. I slept in the elaborate braided hair my mother did for the reaping and it doesnt look too bad, so I just leave it up. It doesnt matter. We cant be far from the Capitol now. And once we reach the city, my stylist will dictate my look for the opening ceremonies tonight anyway. I just hope I get one who doesnt think nudity is the last word in fashion. As I enter the dining car, Effie Trinket brushes by me with a cup of black coffee. Shes muttering obscenities under her breath. Haymitch, his face puffy and red from the previous days indulgences, is chuckling. Peeta holds a roll and looks somewhat embarrassed.Sit down! Sit down! says Haymitch, waving me over. The moment I slide into my chair Im served an enormous platter of food. Eggs, ham, piles of fried potatoes. A tureen of fruit sits in ice to keep it chilled. The basket of rolls they set before me would keep my family going for a week. Theres an elegant glass of orange juice. At least, I think its orange juice. Ive only even tasted an orange once, at New Years when my father bought one as a special treat. A cup of coffee. My mother adores coffee, which we could almost never afford, but it only tastes bitter and thin to me. A rich brown cup of something Ive never seen. They call it hot chocolate, says Peeta. Its good. I take a sip of the hot, sweet, creamy liquid and a shudder runs through me. Even though the rest of the meal beckons, I ignore it until Ive drained my cup. Then I stuff down every mouthful I can hold, which is a substantial amount, being careful to not overdo it on the richest stuff. One time, my mother told me that I always eat like Ill never see food again. And I said, I wont unless I bring it home. That shut her up. When my stomach feels like its about to split open, I lean back and take in my breakfast companions. Peeta is still eating, breaking off bits of roll and dipping them in hot chocolate. Haymitch hasnt paid much attention to his platter, but hes knocking

back a glass of red juice that he keeps thinning with a clear liquid from a bottle. Judging by the fumes, its some kind of spirit. I dont know Haymitch, but Ive seen him often enough in the Hob, tossing handfuls of money on the counter of the woman who sells white liquor. Hell be incoherent by the time we reach the Capitol. I realize I detest Haymitch. No wonder the District 12 tributes never stand a chance. It isnt just that weve been underfed and lack training. Some of our tributes have still been strong enough to make a go of it. But we rarely get sponsors and hes a big part of the reason why. The rich people who back tributes

either because theyre betting on them or simply for the bragging rights of picking a winner expect someone classier than Haymitch to deal with. So, youre supposed to give us advice, I say to Haymitch. Heres some advice. Stay alive, says Haymitch, and then bursts out laughing. I exchange a look with Peeta before I remember Im having nothing more to do with him. Im surprised to see the hardness in his eyes. He generally seems so mild. Thats very funny, says Peeta. Suddenly he lashes out at the glass in Haymitchs hand. It shatters on the floor, sending the bloodred liquid running toward the back of the train. Only not to us. Haymitch considers this a moment, then punches Peeta in the jaw, knocking him from his chair. When he turns back to reach for the spirits, I drive my knife into the table between his hand and the bottle, barely missing his fingers. I brace myself to deflect his hit, but it doesnt come. Instead he sits back and squints at us. Well, whats this? says Haymitch. Did I actually get a pair of fighters this year? Peeta rises from the floor and scoops up a handful of ice from under the fruit tureen. He starts to raise it to the red mark on his jaw. No, says Haymitch, stopping him. Let the bruise show. The audience will think youve mixed it up with another tribute before youve even made it to the arena. Thats against the rules, says Peeta. Only if they catch you. That bruise will say you fought, you werent caught, even better, says Haymitch. He turns to me. Can you hit anything with that knife besides a table? The bow and arrow is my weapon. But Ive spent a fair amount of time throwing knives as well. Sometimes, if Ive wounded an animal with an arrow, its better to get a knife into it, too, before I approach it. I realize that if I want Haymitchs attention, this is my moment to make an impression. I yank the knife out of the table, get a grip on the blade, and then throw it into the wall

across the room. I was actually just hoping to get a good solid stick, but it lodges in the seam between two panels, making me look a lot better than I am. Stand over here. Both of you, says Haymitch, nodding to the middle of the room. We obey and he circles us, prodding us like animals at times, checking our muscles, examining our faces. Well, youre not entirely hopeless. Seem fit. And once the stylists get hold of you, youll be attractive enough. Peeta and I dont question this. The Hunger Games arent a beauty contest, but the best-looking tributes always seem to pull more sponsors. All right, Ill make a deal with you. You dont interfere with my drinking, and Ill stay sober enough to help you, says Haymitch. But you have to do exactly what I say. Its not much of a deal but still a giant step forward from ten minutes ago when we had no guide at all. Fine, says Peeta. So help us, I say. When we get to the arena, whats the best strategy at the Cornucopia for someone One thing at a time. In a few minutes, well be pulling into the station. Youll be put in the

hands of your stylists. Youre not going to like what they do to you. But no matter what it is, dont resist, says Haymitch. But I begin. No buts. Dont resist, says Haymitch. He takes the bottle of spirits from the table and leaves the car. As the door swings shut behind him, the car goes dark. There are still a few lights inside, but outside its as if night has fallen again. I realize we must be in the tunnel that runs up through the mountains into the Capitol. The mountains form a natural barrier between the Capitol and the eastern districts. It is almost impossible to enter from the east except through the tunnels. This geographical advantage was a major factor in the districts losing the war that led to my being a tribute today. Since the rebels had to scale the mountains, they were easy targets for the Capitols air forces. Peeta Mellark and I stand in silence as the train speeds along. The tunnel goes on and on and I think of the tons of rock separating me from the sky, and my chest tightens. I hate being encased in stone this way. It reminds me of the mines and my father, trapped, unable to reach sunlight, buried forever in the darkness. The train finally begins to slow and suddenly bright light floods the compartment. We cant help it. Both Peeta and I run to the window to see what weve only seen on television, the Capitol, the ruling city of Panem. The cameras havent lied about its grandeur. If anything, they have not quite captured the magnificence of the glistening buildings in

a rainbow of hues that tower into the air, the shiny cars that roll down the wide paved streets, the oddly dressed people with bizarre hair and painted faces who have never missed a meal. All the colors seem artificial, the pinks too deep, the greens too bright, the yellows painful to the eyes, like the flat round disks of hard candy we can never afford to buy at the tiny sweet shop in District 12. The people begin to point at us eagerly as they recognize a tribute train rolling into the city. I step away from the window, sickened by their excitement, knowing they cant wait to watch us die. But Peeta holds his ground, actually waving and smiling at the gawking crowd. He only stops when the train pulls into the station, blocking us from their view. He sees me staring at him and shrugs. Who knows? he says. One of them may be rich. I have misjudged him. I think of his actions since the reaping began. The friendly squeeze of my hand. His father showing up with the cookies and promising to feed Prim . . . Did Peeta put him up to that? His tears at the station. Volunteering to wash Haymitch but then challenging him this morning when apparently the nice-guy approach had failed. And now the waving at the window, already trying to win the crowd. All of the pieces are still fitting together, but I sense he has a plan forming. He hasnt accepted

his death. He is already fighting hard to stay alive. Which also means that kind Peeta Mellark, the boy who gave me the bread, is

fighting hard to kill me.

5.

R-i-i-i-p! I grit my teeth as Venia, a woman with aqua hair and gold tattoos above her eyebrows, yanks a strip of Fabric from my leg tearing out the hair beneath it. Sorry! she pipes in her silly Capitol accent. Youre just so hairy! Why do these people speak in such a high pitch? Why do their jaws barely open when they talk? Why do the ends of their sentences go up as if theyre asking a question? Odd vowels, clipped words, and always a hiss on the letter s . . . No wonder its impossible not to mimic them. Venia makes whats supposed to be a sympathetic face. Good news, though. This is the last one. Ready? I get a grip on the edges of the table Im seated on and nod. The final swathe of my leg hair is uprooted in a painful jerk. Ive been in the Remake Center for more than three hours and I still havent met my stylist. Apparently he has no interest in seeing me until Venia and the other members of my prep team have addressed some obvious problems. This has included scrubbing down my body with a gritty loam that has removed not only dirt but at least three layers of skin, turning my nails into uniform shapes, and primarily, ridding my body of hair. My legs, arms, torso, underarms, and parts of my eyebrows have been stripped of the Muff, leaving me like a plucked bird, ready for roasting. I dont like it. My skin feels sore and tingling

and intensely vulnerable. But I have kept my side of the bargain with Haymitch, and no objection has crossed my lips. Youre doing very well, says some guy named Flavius. He gives his orange corkscrew locks a shake and applies a fresh coat of purple lipstick to his mouth. If theres one thing we cant stand, its a whiner. Grease her down! Venia and Octavia, a plump woman whose entire body has been dyed a pale shade of pea green, rub me down with a lotion that first stings but then soothes my raw skin. Then they pull me from the table, removing the thin robe Ive been allowed to wear off and on. I stand there, completely naked, as the three circle me, wielding tweezers to remove any last bits of hair. I know I should be embarrassed, but theyre so unlike people that Im no more self-conscious than if a trio of oddly colored birds were pecking around my feet. The three step back and admire their work. Excellent! You almost look like a human being now! says Flavius, and they all laugh. I force my lips up into a smile to show how grateful I am. Thank you, I say sweetly. We dont have much cause to look nice in District Twelve. This wins them over completely. Of course, you dont, you poor darling! says Octavia clasping her hands together in distress for me. But dont worry, says Venia. By the time Cinna is through with you, youre going to be absolutely gorgeous! We promise! You know, now that weve gotten rid of all the hair and filth, youre not horrible at all! says Flavius encouragingly. Lets call Cinna! They dart out of the room. Its hard to hate my prep team. Theyre such total idiots. And yet, in an odd way, I know

theyre sincerely trying to help me. I look at the cold white walls and floor and resist the impulse to retrieve my robe. But this Cinna, my stylist, will surely make me remove it at once. Instead my hands go to my hairdo, the one area of my body my prep team had been told to leave alone. My fingers stroke the silky braids my mother so carefully arranged. My mother. I left her blue dress and shoes on the floor of my train car, never thinking about retrieving them, of trying to hold on to a piece of her, of home. Now I wish I had. The door opens and a young man who must be Cinna enters. Im taken aback by how normal he looks. Most of the stylists they interview on television are so dyed, stenciled, and surgically altered theyre grotesque. But Cinnas close-cropped hair appears to be its natural shade of brown. Hes in a simple black shirt and pants. The only concession to self-alteration seems to be metallic gold

eyeliner that has been applied with a light hand. It brings out the flecks of gold in his green eyes. And, despite my disgust with the Capitol and their hideous fashions, I cant help thinking how attractive it looks. Hello, Katniss. Im Cinna, your stylist, he says in a quiet voice somewhat lacking in the Capitols affectations. Hello, I venture cautiously. Just give me a moment, all right? he asks. He walks around my naked body, not touching me, but taking in every inch of it with his eyes. I resist the impulse to cross my arms over my chest. Who did your hair? My mother, I say. Its beautiful. Classic really. And in almost perfect balance with your profile. She has very clever fingers, he says. I had expected someone flamboyant, someone older trying desperately to look young, someone who viewed me as a piece of meat to be prepared for a platter. Cinna has met none of these expectations. Youre new, arent you? I dont think Ive seen you before, I say. Most of the stylists are familiar, constants in the ever-changing pool of tributes. Some have been around my whole life. Yes, this is my first year in the Games, says Cinna. So they gave you District Twelve, I say. Newcomers generally end up with us, the least desirable district. I asked for District Twelve, he says without further explanation. Why dont you put on your robe and well have a chat. Pulling on my robe, I follow him through a door into a sitting room. Two red couches face off over a low table. Three walls are blank, the fourth is entirely glass, providing a window to the city. I can see by the light that it must be around noon, although the sunny sky has turned overcast. Cinna invites me to sit on one of the couches and takes his place across from me. He presses a button on the side of the table. The top splits and from below rises a second tabletop that holds our lunch. Chicken and chunks of oranges cooked in a creamy sauce laid on a bed of pearly white grain, tiny green peas and onions, rolls shaped like flowers, and for dessert, a pudding the color of honey. I try to imagine

assembling this meal myself back home. Chickens are too expensive, but I could make do with a wild turkey. Id need to shoot a second turkey to trade for an orange. Goats milk would have to substitute for cream. We can grow peas in the garden. Id have to get wild onions from the woods. I dont recognize the grain, our own tessera ration cooks down to an unattractive brown mush. Fancy rolls would mean another trade with the baker, perhaps for two or three squirrels. As for the

pudding, I cant even guess whats in it. Days of hunting and gathering for this one meal and even then it would be a poor substitution for the Capitol version. What must it be like, I wonder, to live in a world where food appears at the press of a button? How would I spend the hours I now commit to combing the woods for sustenance if it were so easy to come by? What do they do all day, these people in the Capitol, besides decorating their bodies and waiting around for a new shipment of tributes to roll in and die for their entertainment? I look up and find Cinnas eyes trained on mine. How despicable we must seem to you, he says. Has he seen this in my face or somehow read my thoughts? Hes right, though. The whole rotten lot of them is despicable. No matter, says Cinna. So, Katniss, about your costume for the opening ceremonies. My partner, Portia, is the stylist for your fellow tribute, Peeta. And our current thought is to dress you in complementary costumes, says Cinna. As you know, its customary to reflect the flavor of the district. For the opening ceremonies, youre supposed to wear something that suggests your districts principal industry. District 11, agriculture. District 4, fishing. District 3, factories. This means that coming from District 12, Peeta and I will be in some kind of coal miners getup.Since the baggy miners jumpsuits are not particularly becoming, our tributes usually end up in skimpy outfits and hats with headlamps. One year, our tributes were stark naked and covered in black powder to represent coal dust. Its always dreadful and does nothing to win favor with the crowd. I prepare myself for the worst. So, Ill be in a coal miner outfit? I ask, hoping it wont be indecent. Not exactly. You see, Portia and I think that coal miner things very overdone. No one will remember you in that. And we both see it as our job to make the District Twelve tributes unforgettable, says Cinna. Ill be naked for sure, I think. So rather than focus on the coal mining itself, were going to focus on the coal, says Cinna. Naked and covered in black dust, I think. And what do we do with coal? We burn it, says Cinna. Youre not afraid of fire, are you, Katniss? He sees my expression and grins. A few hours later, I am dressed in what will either be the most sensational or the deadliest costume in the opening ceremonies. Im in a simple black unitard that covers me from ankle to neck. Shiny leather boots lace up to my knees. But its the fluttering cape made of streams of orange, yellow,


and red and the matching headpiece that define this costume. Cinna plans to light them on fire just before our chariot rolls into the streets. Its not real flame, of course, just a little synthetic fire Portia and I came up with. Youll be perfectly safe, he says. But Im not convinced I wont be perfectly barbecued by the time we reach the citys center. My face is relatively clear of makeup, just a bit of highlighting here and there. My hair has been brushed out and then braided down my back in my usual style. I want the audience to recognize you when youre in the arena, says Cinna dreamily. Katniss, the girl who was on fire. It crosses my mind that Cinnas calm and normal demeanor masks a complete madman. Despite this mornings revelation about Peetas character, Im actually relieved when he shows up, dressed in an identical costume. He should know about fire, being a bakers son and all. His stylist, Portia, and her team accompany him in, and everyone is absolutely giddy with excitement over what a splash well make. Except Cinna. He just seems a bit weary as he accepts congratulations. Were whisked down to the bottom level of the Remake Center, which is essentially a gigantic stable. The opening ceremonies are about to start. Pairs of tributes are being loaded into chariots pulled by teams of four horses.Ours are coal black. The animals are so well trained, no one even needs to guide their reins. Cinna and Portia direct us into the chariot and carefully arrange our body positions, the drape of our capes, before moving off to consult with each other. What do you think? I whisper to Peeta. About the fire? Ill rip off your cape if youll rip off mine, he says through gritted teeth. Deal, I say. Maybe, if we can get them off soon enough, well avoid the worst burns. Its bad though. Theyll throw us into the arena no matter what condition were in. I know we promised Haymitch wed do exactly what they said, but I dont think he considered this angle. Where is Haymitch, anyway? Isnt he supposed to protect us from this sort of thing? says Peeta. With all that alcohol in him, its probably not advisable to have him around an open flame, I say. And suddenly were both laughing. I guess were both so nervous about the Games and more pressingly, petrified of being turned into human torches, were not acting sensibly. The opening music begins. Its easy to hear, blasted around the Capitol. Massive doors slide open revealing the crowd-lined streets. The ride lasts about twenty minutes and ends up at the City Circle, where they will welcome us, play the anthem, and escort us into the Training Center, which will be our home/prison until

the Games begin. The tributes from District 1 ride out in a chariot pulled by snow-white horses. They look so beautiful, spray-painted silver, in tasteful tunics glittering with jewels. District 1 makes luxury items for the Capitol. You can hear the roar of the crowd. They are always favorites. District 2 gets into position to follow them. In

no time at all, we are approaching the door and I can see that between the overcast sky and evening hour the light is turning gray. The tributes from District 11 are just rolling out when Cinna appears with a lighted torch. Here we go then, he says, and before we can react he sets our capes on fire. I gasp, waiting for the heat, but there is only a faint tickling sensation. Cinna climbs up before us and ignites our headdresses. He lets out a sign of relief. It works. Then he gently tucks a hand under my chin. Remember, heads high. Smiles. Theyre going to love you! Cinna jumps off the chariot and has one last idea. He shouts something up at us, but the music drowns him out. He shouts again and gestures. Whats he saying? I ask Peeta. For the first time, I look at him and realize that ablaze with the fake flames, he is dazzling. And I must be, too. I think he said for us to hold hands, says Peeta. He grabs my right hand in his left, and we look to Cinna for confirmation. He nods and gives a thumbs-up, and thats the last thing I see before we enter the city. The crowds initial alarm at our appearance quickly changes to cheers and shouts of District Twelve! Every head is turned our way, pulling the focus from the three chariots ahead of us. At first, Im frozen, but then I catch sight of us on a large television screen and am floored by how breathtaking we look. In the deepening twilight, the firelight illuminates our faces. We seem to be leaving a trail of fire off the flowing capes. Cinna was right about the minimal makeup, we both look more attractive but utterly recognizable. Remember, heads high. Smiles. Theyre going to love you! I hear Cinnas voice in my head. I lift my chin a bit higher, put on my most winning smile, and wave with my free hand. Im glad now I have Peeta to clutch for balance, he is so steady, solid as a rock. As I gain confidence, I actually blow a few kisses to the crowd. The people of the Capitol are going nuts, showering us with flowers, shouting our names, our first names, which they have bothered to find on the program. The pounding music, the cheers, the admiration work their way into my blood, and I cant suppress my excitement. Cinna has given me a great advantage. No one will forget me. Not my look, not my name.

Katniss. The girl who was on fire. For the first time, I feel a flicker of hope rising up in me. Surely, there must be one sponsor willing to take me on! And with a little extra help, some food, the right weapon, why should I count myself out of the Games? Someone throws me a red rose. I catch it, give it a delicate sniff, and blow a kiss back in the general direction of the giver. A hundred hands reach up to catch my kiss, as if it were a real and tangible thing. Katniss! Katniss! I can hear my name being called from all sides. Everyone wants my kisses. Its not until we enter the City Circle that I realize I must have completely stopped the circulation in Peetas hand. Thats how tightly Ive been holding it. I look

down at our linked fingers as I loosen my grasp, but he regains his grip on me. No, dont let go of me, he says. The firelight flickers off his blue eyes. Please. I might fall out of this thing. Okay, I say. So I keep holding on, but I cant help feeling strange about the way Cinna has linked us together. Its not really fair to present us as a team and then lock us into the arena to kill each other. The twelve chariots fill the loop of the City Circle. On the buildings that surround the Circle, every window is packed with the most prestigious citizens of the Capitol. Our horses pull our chariot right up to President Snows mansion, and we come to a halt. The music ends with a flourish. The president, a small, thin man with paper-white hair, gives the official welcome from a balcony above us. It is traditional to cut away to the faces of the tributes during the speech. But I can see on the screen that we are getting way more than our share of airtime. The darker it becomes, the more difficult it is to take your eyes off our flickering. When the national anthem plays, they do make an effort to do a quick cut around to each pair of tributes, but the camera holds on the District 12 chariot as it parades around the circle one final time and disappears into the Training Center. The doors have only just shut behind us when were engulfed by the prep teams, who are nearly unintelligible as they babble out praise. As I glance around, I notice a lot of the other tributes are shooting us dirty looks, which confirms what Ive suspected, weve literally outshone them all. Then Cinna and Portia are there, helping us down from the chariot, carefully removing our flaming capes and headdresses. Portia extinguishes them with some kind of spray from a canister. I realize Im still glued to Peeta and force my stiff fingers to open. We both massage our hands. Thanks

for keeping hold of me. I was getting a little shaky there, says Peeta. It didnt show, I tell him. Im sure no one noticed. Im sure they didnt notice anything but you. You should wear flames more often, he says. They suit you. And then he gives me a smile that seems so genuinely sweet with just the right touch of shyness that unexpected warmth rushes through me. A warning bell goes off in my head. Dont be so stupid. Peeta is planning how to kill you, I remind myself. He is luring you in to make you easy prey. The more likable he is, the more deadly he is. But because two can play at this game, I stand on tiptoe and kiss his cheek. Right on his bruise.

6.

The Training Center has a tower designed exclusively for the tributes and their teams. This will be our home until the actual Games begin. Each district has an entire floor. You simply step onto an elevator and press the number of your district. Easy enough to remember. Ive ridden the elevator a couple of times in the Justice Building back in District 12. Once to receive the medal for my fathers death and then yesterday to say my final goodbyes to my friends and

family. But thats a dark and creaky thing that moves like a snail and smells of sour milk. The walls of this elevator are made of crystal so that you can watch the people on the ground floor shrink to ants as you shoot up into the air. Its exhilarating and Im tempted to ask Effie Trinket if we can ride it again, but somehow that seems childish. Apparently, Effie Trinkets duties did not conclude at the station. She and Haymitch will be overseeing us right into the arena. In a way, thats a plus because at least she can be counted on to corral us around to places on time whereas we havent seen Haymitch since he agreed to help us on the train. Probably passed out somewhere. Effie Trinket, on the other hand, seems to be flying high. Were the first team shes ever chaperoned that made a splash at the opening ceremonies. Shes complimentary about not just our costumes but how we conducted ourselves. And, to hear her tell it, Effie knows everyone whos anyone in the Capitol and has been talking us up all day, trying to win us sponsors. Ive been very mysterious, though, she says, her eyes squint half shut. Because, of course, Haymitch hasnt bothered to

tell me your strategies. But Ive done my best with what I had to work with. How Katniss sacrificed herself for her sister. How youve both successfully struggled to overcome the barbarism of your district. Barbarism? Thats ironic coming from a woman helping to prepare us for slaughter. And whats she basing our success on? Our table manners? Everyone has their reservations, naturally. You being from the coal district. But I said, and this was very clever of me, I said, Well, if you put enough pressure on coal it turns to pearls! Effie beams at us so brilliantly that we have no choice but to respond enthusiastically to her cleverness even though its wrong. Coal doesnt turn to pearls. They grow in shellfish. Possibly she meant coal turns to diamonds, but thats untrue, too. Ive heard they have some sort of machine in District 1 that can turn graphite into diamonds. But we dont mine graphite in District 12. That was part of District 13s job until they were destroyed. I wonder if the people shes been plugging us to all day either know or care. Unfortunately, I cant seal the sponsor deals for you. Only Haymitch can do that, says Effie grimly. But dont worry, Ill get him to the table at gunpoint if necessary. Although lacking in many departments, Effie Trinket has a certain determination I have to admire. My quarters are larger than our entire house back home. They are plush, like the train car, but also have so many automatic gadgets that Im sure I wont have time to press all the buttons. The shower alone has a panel with more than a hundred options you can choose regulating water temperature, pressure, soaps, shampoos, scents, oils, and massaging sponges. When you step out on a mat, heaters come on that blow-dry your body. Instead of struggling with the knots in my wet hair, I merely place my hand on a box that sends

a current through my scalp, untangling, parting, and drying my hair almost instantly. It floats down around my shoulders in a glossy curtain. I program the closet for an outfit to my taste. The windows zoom in and out on parts of the city at my command. You need only whisper a type of food from a gigantic menu into a mouthpiece and it appears, hot and steamy, before you in less than a minute. I walk around the room eating goose liver and puffy bread until theres a knock on the door. Effies calling me to dinner. Good. Im starving. Peeta, Cinna, and Portia are standing out on a balcony that overlooks the Capitol when we enter the dining room. Im glad

to see the stylists, particularly after I hear that Haymitch will be joining us. A meal presided over by just Effie and Haymitch is bound to be a disaster. Besides, dinner isnt really about food, its about planning out our strategies, and Cinna and Portia have already proven how valuable they are. A silent young man dressed in a white tunic offers us all stemmed glasses of wine. I think about turning it down, but Ive never had wine, except the homemade stuff my mother uses for coughs, and when will I get a chance to try it again? I take a sip of the tart, dry liquid and secretly think it could be improved by a few spoonfuls of honey. Haymitch shows up just as dinner is being served. It looks as if hes had his own stylist because hes clean and groomed and about as sober as Ive ever seen him. He doesnt refuse the offer of wine, but when he starts in on his soup, I realize its the first time Ive ever seen him eat. Maybe he really will pull himself together long enough to help us. Cinna and Portia seem to have a civilizing effect on Haymitch and Effie. At least theyre addressing each other decently. And they both have nothing but praise for our stylists opening act. While they make small talk, I concentrate on the meal. Mushroom soup, bitter greens with tomatoes the size of peas, rare roast beef sliced as thin as paper, noodles in a green sauce, cheese that melts on your tongue served with sweet blue grapes. The servers, all young people dressed in white tunics like the one who gave us wine, move wordlessly to and from the table, keeping the platters and glasses full. About halfway through my glass of wine, my head starts feeling foggy, so I change to water instead. I dont like the feeling and hope it wears off soon. How Haymitch can stand walking around like this full-time is a mystery. I try to focus on the talk, which has turned to our interview costumes, when a girl sets a gorgeous-looking cake on the table and deftly lights it. It blazes up and then the flames flicker around the edges awhile until it finally goes out. I have a moment of doubt. What makes it burn? Is it alcohol? I say, looking up at the girl. Thats the last thing I wa oh! I know you! I cant place a name or time to the girls face. But Im certain of it. The dark red hair, the striking features, the porcelain white skin. But even as I utter the words, I feel my insides contracting with anxiety and guilt at the sight of her, and while I cant pull it up, I know some bad memory is associated with her. The expression of terror that crosses her face only adds to my confusion and unease. She shakes her head in denial quickly and hurries away from the table. When I look back, the four adults are watching me like hawks. Dont be ridiculous, Katniss. How could you possibly know an Avox? snaps Effie. The very thought. Whats an Avox? I ask stupidly. Someone who committed a crime. They cut her tongue so she cant speak, says Haymitch. Shes probably a traitor of some sort. Not likely youd know her. And even if you did, youre not to speak to one of them unless its to give an order, says Effie. Of course, you dont really know her. But I do know her. And now that Haymitch has mentioned the word traitor I remember from where. The

disapproval is so high I could never admit it. No, I guess not, I just I stammer, and the wine is not helping. Peeta snaps his fingers. Delly Cartwright. Thats who it is. I kept thinking she looked familiar as well. Then I realized shes a dead ringer for Delly. Delly Cartwright is a pasty-faced, lumpy girl with yellowish hair who looks about as much like our server as a beetle does a butterfly. She may also be the friendliest person on the planet she smiles constantly at everybody in school, even me. I have never seen the girl with the red hair smile. But I jump on Peetas suggestion gratefully. Of course, thats who I was thinking of. It must be the hair, I say. Something about the eyes, too, says Peeta. The energy at the table relaxes. Oh, well. If thats all it is, says Cinna. And yes, the cake has spirits, but all the alcohol has burned off. I ordered it specially in honor of your fiery debut. We eat the cake and move into a sitting room to watch the replay of the opening ceremonies thats being broadcast. A few of the other couples make a nice impression, but none of them can hold a candle to us. Even our own party lets out an Ahh! as they show us coming out of the Remake Center. Whose idea was the hand holding? asks Haymitch. Cinnas, says Portia. Just the perfect touch of rebellion, says Haymitch. Very nice. Rebellion? I have to think about that one a moment. But when I remember the other couples, standing stiffly apart, never touching or acknowledging each other, as if their fellow tribute did not exist, as if the Games had already begun, I know what Haymitch means. Presenting ourselves not as adversaries but as friends has distinguished us as much as the fiery costumes. Tomorrow morning is the first training session. Meet me for breakfast and Ill tell you exactly how I want you to play it, says Haymitch to Peeta and I. Now go get some sleep while the grown-ups talk. Peeta and I walk together down the corridor to our rooms. When we get to my door, he leans against the frame, not blocking my entrance exactly but insisting I pay attention to him. So, Delly Cartwright.

Imagine finding her lookalike here. Hes asking for an explanation, and Im tempted to give him one. We both know he covered for me. So here I am in his debt again. If I tell him the truth about the girl, somehow that might even things up. How can it hurt really? Even if he repeated the story, it couldnt do me much harm. It was just something I witnessed. And he lied as much as I did about Delly Cartwright. I realize I do want to talk to someone about the girl. Someone who might be able to

help me figure out her story. Gale would be my first choice, but its unlikely Ill ever see Gale again. I try to think if telling Peeta could give him any possible advantage over me, but I dont see how. Maybe sharing a confidence will actually make him believe I see him as a friend. Besides, the idea of the girl with her maimed tongue frightens me. She has reminded me why Im here. Not to model flashy costumes and eat delicacies. But to die a bloody death while the crowds urge on my killer. To tell or not to tell? My brain still feels slow from the wine. I stare down the empty corridor as if the decision lies there. Peeta picks up on my hesitation. Have you been on the roof yet? I shake my head. Cinna showed me. You can practically see the whole city. The winds a bit loud, though. I translate this into No one will overhear us talking in my head. You do have the sense that we might be under surveillance here. Can we just go up? Sure, come on, says Peeta. I follow him to a flight of stairs that lead to the roof. Theres a small dome-shaped room with a door to the outside. As we step into the cool, windy evening air, I catch my breath at the view. The Capitol twinkles like a vast field of fireflies. Electricity in District 12 comes and goes, usually we only have it a few hours a day. Often the evenings are spent in candlelight. The only time you can count on it is when theyre airing the Games or some important government message on television that its mandatory to watch. But here there would be no shortage. Ever. Peeta and I walk to a railing at the edge of the roof. I look straight down the side of the building to the street, which is buzzing with people. You can hear their cars, an occasional shout, and a strange metallic tinkling. In District 12, wed all be thinking about bed right now. I asked Cinna why they let us up here. Werent they worried that some of the tributes might decide to jump right over the side? says Peeta. Whatd he say? I ask. You cant, says Peeta. He holds out his hand into seemingly empty space. Theres a sharp zap and he jerks it back. Some kind of electric field throws you back on the roof. Always worried about our safety, I say. Even though Cinna has shown Peeta the roof, I wonder if were supposed to be up here now, so late and alone. Ive never seen tributes on the Training Center roof before. But that doesnt mean were not being taped. Do you think theyre watching us now? Maybe, he admits. Come see the garden. On the other side of the dome,

theyve built a garden with flower beds and potted trees. From the branches

hang hundreds of wind chimes, which account for the tinkling I heard. Here in the garden, on this windy night, its enough to drown out two people who are trying not to be heard. Peeta looks at me expectantly. I pretend to examine a blossom. We were hunting in the woods one day. Hidden, waiting for game, I whisper. You and your father? he whispers back. No, my friend Gale. Suddenly all the birds stopped singing at once. Except one. As if it were giving a warning call. And then we saw her. Im sure it was the same girl. A boy was with her. Their clothes were tattered. They had dark circles under their eyes from no sleep. They were running as if their lives depended on it, I say. For a moment Im silent, as I remember how the sight of this strange pair, clearly not from District 12, fleeing through the woods immobilized us. Later, we wondered if we could have helped them escape. Perhaps we might have. Concealed them. If wed moved quickly. Gale and I were taken by surprise, yes, but were both hunters. We know how animals look at bay. We knew the pair was in trouble as soon as we saw them. But we only watched. The hovercraft appeared out of nowhere, I continue to Peeta. I mean, one moment the sky was empty and the next it was there. It didnt make a sound, but they saw it. A net dropped down on the girl and carried her up, fast, so fast like the elevator. They shot some sort of spear through the boy. It was attached to a cable and they hauled him up as well. But Im certain he was dead. We heard the girl scream once. The boys name, I think. Then it was gone, the hovercraft. Vanished into thin air. And the birds began to sing again, as if nothing had happened. Did they see you? Peeta asked. I dont know. We were under a shelf of rock, I reply. But I do know. There was a moment, after the birdcall, but before the hovercraft, where the girl had seen us. Shed locked eyes with me and called out for help. But neither Gale or I had responded. Youre shivering, says Peeta. The wind and the story have blown all the warmth from my body. The girls scream. Had it been her last? Peeta takes off his jacket and wraps it around my shoulders. I start to take a step back, but then I let him, deciding for a moment to accept both his jacket and his kindness. A friend would do that, right? They were from here? he asks, and he secures a button at my neck. I nod. Theyd had that Capitol look about them. The boy and the girl. Where do you suppose they were going? he asks. I dont know that, I say. District 12 is pretty much the end of the line. Beyond us, theres only wilderness. If you dont count the ruins of District 13 that still smolder from the toxic

bombs. They show it on television occasionally, just to remind us. Or why they would leave here. Haymitch had called the Avoxes traitors. Against what? It could only be the Capitol. But they had everything here. No cause to rebel. Id leave here, Peeta blurts

out. Then he looks around nervously. It was loud enough to hear above the chimes. He laughs. Id go home now if they let me. But you have to admit, the foods prime. Hes covered again. If thats all youd heard it would just sound like the words of a scared tribute, not someone contemplating the unquestionable goodness of the Capitol. Its getting chilly. We better go in, he says. Inside the dome, its warm and bright. His tone is conversational. Your friend Gale. Hes the one who took your sister away at the reaping? Yes. Do you know him? I ask. Not really. I hear the girls talk about him a lot. I thought he was your cousin or something. You favor each other, he says. No, were not related, I say. Peeta nods, unreadable. Did he come to say good-bye to you? Yes, I say, observing him carefully. So did your father. He brought me cookies. Peeta raises his eyebrows as if this is news. But after watching him lie so smoothly, I dont give this much weight. Really? Well, he likes you and your sister. I think he wishes he had a daughter instead of a houseful of boys. The idea that I might ever have been discussed, around the dinner table, at the bakery fire, just in passing in Peetas house gives me a start. It must have been when the mother was out of the room. He knew your mother when they were kids, says Peeta. Another surprise. But probably true. Oh, yes. She grew up in town, I say. It seems impolite to say she never mentioned the baker except to compliment his bread. Were at my door. I give back his jacket. See you in the morning then. See you, he says, and walks off down the hall. When I open my door, the redheaded girl is collecting my unitard and boots from where I left them on the floor before my shower. I want to apologize for possibly getting her in trouble earlier. But I remember Im not supposed to speak to her unless Im giving her an order. Oh, sorry, I say. I was supposed to get those back to Cinna. Im sorry. Can you take them to him? She avoids my eyes, gives a small nod, and heads out the door. Id set out to tell her I was sorry about dinner. But I know that my apology runs much deeper. That Im ashamed I never tried to help her in the woods. That I let the Capitol kill the boy and mutilate her without lifting a

finger. Just like I was watching the Games. I kick off my shoes and climb under the covers in my clothes. The shivering hasnt stopped. Perhaps the girl doesnt even remember me. But I know she does. You dont forget the face of the person who was your last hope. I pull the covers up over my head as if this will protect me from the redheaded girl who cant speak. But I can feel her eyes staring at me, piercing through walls and doors and bedding. I wonder if shell enjoy watching me die.

7.

My slumbers are filled with disturbing dreams. The face of the redheaded girl intertwines with gory images from earlier Hunger Games, with my mother withdrawn and unreachable, with Prim emaciated and terrified. I bolt up screaming for my father to run as the mine

explodes into a million deadly bits of light. Dawn is breaking through the windows. The Capitol has a misty, haunted air. My head aches and I must have bitten into the side of my cheek in the night. My tongue probes the ragged flesh and I taste blood. Slowly, I drag myself out of bed and into the shower. I arbitrarily punch buttons on the control board and end up hopping from foot to foot as alternating jets of icy cold and steaming hot water assault me. Then Im deluged in lemony foam that I have to scrape off with a heavy bristled brush. Oh, well. At least my blood is flowing. When Im dried and moisturized with lotion, I find an outfit has been left for me at the front of the closet. Tight black pants, a long-sleeved burgundy tunic, and leather shoes. I put my hair in the single braid down my back. This is the first time since the morning of the reaping that I resemble myself. No fancy hair and clothes, no flaming capes. Just me. Looking like I could be headed for the woods. It calms me. Haymitch didnt give us an exact time to meet for break-last and no one has contacted me this morning, but Im hungry so I head down to the dining room, hoping there will be food. Im not disappointed. While the table is empty, a long board off to the side has been laid with at least twenty dishes. A young man, an Avox, stands at attention by the spread. When I ask if I can serve myself, he nods assent. I load a plate with eggs, sausages, batter cakes covered in thick orange preserves, slices of pale purple melon.

As I gorge myself, I watch the sun rise over the Capitol. I have a second plate of hot grain smothered in beef stew. Finally, I fill a plate with rolls and sit at the table, breaking oil bits and dipping them into hot chocolate, the way Peeta did on the train. My mind wanders to my mother and Prim. They must be up. My mother getting their breakfast of mush. Prim milking her goat before school. Just two mornings ago, I was home. Can that be right? Yes, just two. And now how empty the house feels, even from a distance. What did they say last night about my fiery debut at the Games? Did it give them hope, or simply add to their terror when they saw the reality of twenty-four tributes circled together, knowing only one could live? Haymitch and Peeta come in, bid me good morning, fill their plates. It makes me irritated that Peeta is wearing exactly the same outfit I am. I need to say something to Cinna. This twins act is going to blow up in out faces once the Games begin. Surely, they must know this. Then I remember Haymitch telling me to do exactly what the stylists tell me to do. If it was anyone but Cinna, I might be tempted to ignore him. But after last nights triumph, I dont have a lot of room to criticize his choices. Im nervous about the training. There will be three days in which all the tributes practice together. On the last afternoon, well each get a chance to perform in private before the Gamemakers. The thought of meeting the other tributes

face-to-face makes me queasy. I turn the roll I have just taken from the basket over and over in my hands, but my appetite is gone. When Haymitch has finished several platters of stew, he pushes back his plate with a sigh. He takes a flask from his pocket and takes a long pull on it and leans his elbows on the table. So, lets get down to business. Training. First off, if you like, Ill coach you separately. Decide now. Why would you coach us separately? I ask. Say if you had a secret skill you might not want the other to know about, says Haymitch. I exchange a look with Peeta. I dont have any secret skills, he says. And I already know what yours is, right? I mean, Ive eaten enough of your squirrels. I never thought about Peeta eating the squirrels I shot. Somehow I always pictured the baker quietly going off and frying them up for himself. Not out of greed. But because town families usually eat expensive butcher meat. Beef and chicken and horse. You can coach us together, I tell Haymitch. Peeta nods. All right, so give me some idea of what you can do, says Haymitch. I cant do

anything, says Peeta. Unless you count baking bread. Sorry, I dont. Katniss. I already know youre handy with a knife, says Haymitch. Not really. But I can hunt, I say. With a bow and arrow. And youre good? asks Haymitch. I have to think about it. Ive been putting food on the table for four years. Thats no small task. Im not as good as my father was, but hed had more practice. Ive better aim than Gale, but Ive had more practice. Hes a genius with traps and snares. Im all right, I say. Shes excellent, says Peeta. My father buys her squirrels. He always comments on how the arrows never pierce the body. She hits every one in the eye. Its the same with the rabbits she sells the butcher. She can even bring down deer. This assessment of my skills from Peeta takes me totally by surprise. First, that he ever noticed. Second, that hes talking me up. What are you doing? I ask him suspiciously. What are you doing? If hes going to help you, he has to know what youre capable of. Dont underrate yourself, says Peeta. I dont know why, but this rubs me the wrong way. What about you? Ive seen you in the market. You can lift hundred-pound bags of flour, I snap at him. Tell him that. Thats not nothing. Yes, and Im sure the arena will be full of bags of flour for me to chuck at people. Its not like being able to use a weapon. You know it isnt, he shoots back. He can wrestle, I tell Haymitch. He came in second in our school competition last year, only after his brother. What use is that? How many times have you seen someone wrestle someone to death? says Peeta in disgust. Theres always hand-to-hand combat. All you need is to come up with a knife, and youll at least stand a chance. If I get jumped, Im dead! I can hear my voice rising in anger. But you wont! Youll be living up in some tree eating raw squirrels and picking off people with arrows. You know what my mother said to me when she came to say

good-bye, as if to cheer me up, she says maybe District Twelve will finally have a winner. Then I realized, she didnt mean me, she meant you! bursts out Peeta. Oh, she meant you, I say with a wave of dismissal. She said, Shes a survivor, that one. She is, says Peeta. That pulls me up short. Did his mother really say that about me? Did she rate me over her son? I see the pain in Peetas eyes and know he isnt lying. Suddenly Im behind the bakery and I can feel the chill of the rain running down my back, the hollowness in my belly. I sound eleven years old when I speak. But only because someone helped me. Peetas eyes flicker down to the roll in my hands, and I

know he remembers that day, too. But he just shrugs. People will help you in the arena. Theyll be tripping over each other to sponsor you. No more than you, I say. Peeta rolls his eyes at Haymitch. She has no idea. The effect she can have. He runs his fingernail along the wood grain in the table, refusing to look at me. What on earth does he mean? People help me? When we were dying of starvation, no one helped me! No one except Peeta. Once I had something to barter with, things changed. Im a tough trader. Or am I? What effect do I have? That Im weak and needy? Is he suggesting that I got good deals because people pitied me? I try to think if this is true. Perhaps some of the merchants were a little generous in their trades, but I always attributed that to their long-standing relationship with my father. Besides, my game is first-class. No one pitied me! I glower at the roll sure he meant to insult me. After about a minute of this, Haymitch says, Well, then. Well, well, well. Katniss, theres no guarantee theyll be bows and arrows in the arena, but during your private session with the Gamemakers, show them what you can do. Until then, stay clear of archery. Are you any good at trapping? I know a few basic snares, I mutter. That may be significant in terms of food, says Haymitch. And Peeta, shes right, never  underestimate strength in the arena. Very often, physical power tilts the advantage to a player. In the Training Center, they will have weights, but dont reveal how much you can lift in front of the other tributes. The plans the same for both of you. You go to group training. Spend the time trying to learn something you dont know. Throw a spear. Swing a mace. Learn to tie a decent knot. Save showing what youre best at until your private sessions. Are we clear? says Haymitch. Peeta and I nod. One last thing. In public, I want you by each others side every minute, says Haymitch. We both start to object, but Haymitch slams his hand on the table. Every minute! Its not open for discussion! You agreed to do as I said! You will be together, you will appear amiable to each other. Now get out. Meet Effie at the elevator at ten for training. I bite my lip and stalk back to my room, making sure Peeta can hear the door slam. I sit on the bed, hating Haymitch, hating Peeta, hating myself for mentioning

that day long ago in the rain. Its such a joke! Peeta and I going along pretending to be friends! Talking up each others strengths, insisting the other take credit for their abilities. Because, in fact, at some point, were going to have to knock it off and accept

were bitter adversaries. Which Id be prepared to do right now if it wasnt for Haymitchs stupid instruction that we stick together in training. Its my own fault, I guess, for telling him he didnt have to coach us separately. But that didnt mean I wanted to do everything with Peeta. Who, by the way, clearly doesnt want to be partnering up with me, either. I hear Peetas voice in my head. She has no idea. The effect she can have. Obviously meant to demean me. Right? but a tiny part of me wonders if this was a compliment. That he meant I was appealing in some way. Its weird, how much hes noticed me. Like the attention hes paid to my hunting. And apparently, I have not been as oblivious to him as I imagined, either. The flour. The wrestling. I have kept track of the boy with the bread. Its almost ten. I clean my teeth and smooth back my hair again. Anger temporarily blocked out my nervousness about meeting the other tributes, but now I can feel my anxiety rising again. By the time I meet Effie and Peeta at the elevator, I catch myself biting my nails. I stop at once. The actual training rooms are below ground level of our building. With these elevators, the ride is less than a minute. The doors open into an enormous gymnasium filled with various weapons and obstacle courses. Although its not yet ten, were the last ones to arrive. The other tributes are gathered in a tense circle. They each have a cloth square with their district number on it pinned to their shirts. While someone pins the number 12 on my back, I do a quick assessment. Peeta and I are the only two dressed alike. As soon as we join the circle, the head trainer, a tall, athletic woman named Atala steps up and begins to explain the training schedule. Experts in each skill will remain at their stations. We will be free to travel from area to area as we choose, per our mentors instructions. Some of the stations teach survival skills, others fighting techniques. We are forbidden to engage in any combative exercise with another tribute. There are assistants on hand if we want to practice with a partner. When Atala begins to read down the list of the skill stations, my eyes cant help flitting around to the other tributes. Its the first time weve been assembled, on level ground, in simple clothes. My heart sinks. Almost all of the boys and at least half of the girls are bigger than I am, even though many of the tributes have never been fed properly. You can see it in their bones, their skin, the hollow look in their eyes. I may be smaller naturally, but overall my familys resourcefulness has given me an edge in that area. I stand straight, and while Im thin, Im strong. The

meat and plants from the woods combined with the exertion it took

to get them have given me a healthier body than most of those I see around me. The exceptions are the kids from the wealthier districts, the volunteers, the ones who have been fed and trained throughout their lives for this moment. The tributes from 1, 2, and 4 traditionally have this look about them. Its technically against the rules to train tributes before they reach the Capitol but it happens every year. In District 12, we call them the Career Tributes, or just the Careers. And like as not, the winner will be one of them. The slight advantage I held coming into the Training Center, my fiery entrance last night, seems to vanish in the presence of my competition. The other tributes were jealous of us, but not because we were amazing, because our stylists were. Now I see nothing but contempt in the glances of the Career Tributes. Each must have fifty to a hundred pounds on me. They project arrogance and brutality. When Atala releases us, they head straight for the deadliest-looking weapons in the gym and handle them with ease. Im thinking that its lucky Im a fast runner when Peeta nudges my arm and I jump. He is still beside me, per Haymitchs instructions.His expression is sober. Where would you like to start? I look around at the Career Tributes who are showing off, clearly trying to intimidate the field. Then at the others, the underfed, the incompetent, shakily having their first lessons with a knife or an ax. Suppose we tie some knots, I say. Right you are, says Peeta. We cross to an empty station where the trainer seems pleased to have students. You get the feeling that the knot-tying class is not the Hunger games hot spot. When he realizes I know something about snares, he shows us a simple, excellent trap that will leave a human competitor dangling by a leg from a tree. We concentrate on this one skill for an hour until both of us have mastered it. Then we move on to camouflage. Peeta genuinely seems to enjoy this station, swirling a combination of mud and clay and berry juices around on his pale skin, weaving disguises from vines and leaves. The trainer who runs the camouflage station is full of enthusiasm at his work. I do the cakes, he admits to me. The cakes? I ask. Ive been preoccupied with watching the boy from District 2 send a spear through a dummys heart from fifteen yards. What cakes? At home. The iced ones, for the bakery, he says. He means the ones they display in the windows. Fancy cakes with flowers and pretty things painted in frosting. Theyre for birthdays

and New Years Day. When were in the square, Prim always drags me over to admire them, although wed never be able to afford one. Theres little enough beauty in District 12, though, so I can hardly deny her this. I look more critically at the design on Peetas arm. The alternating pattern of light and dark suggests sunlight falling through the leaves in the woods. I wonder how he knows this, since I doubt hes ever been beyond the fence. Has he been able to pick this up from just that scraggly old apple tree in his backyard? Somehow the whole thing his skill, those inaccessible cakes, the praise of the camouflage expert annoys me. Its lovely. If only you could frost someone to death, I say. Dont be so superior. You can never tell what youll find in the arena. Say its actually a gigantic cake begins Peeta. Say we move on, I break in. So the next three days pass with Peeta and I going quietly from station to station. We do pick up some valuable skills, from starting fires, to knife throwing, to making shelter. Despite Haymitchs order to appear mediocre, Peeta excels in hand-to-hand combat, and I sweep the edible plants test without blinking an eye. We steer clear of archery and weightlifting though, wanting to save those for our private sessions. The Gamemakers appeared early on the first day. Twenty or so men and women dressed in deep purple robes. They sit in the elevated stands that surround the gymnasium, sometimes wandering about to watch us, jotting down notes, other times eating at the endless banquet that has been set for them, ignoring the lot of us. But they do seem to be keeping their eye on the District 12 tributes. Several times Ive looked up to find one fixated on me. They consult with the trainers during our meals as well. We see them all gathered together when we come back. Breakfast and dinner are served on our floor, but at lunch the twenty-four of us eat in a dining room off the gymnasium. Food is arranged on carts around the room and you serve yourself. The Career Tributes tend to gather rowdily around one table, as if to prove their superiority, that they have no fear of one another and consider the rest of us beneath notice. Most of the other tributes sit alone, like lost sheep. No one says a word to us. Peeta and I eat together, and since Haymitch keeps dogging us about it, try to keep up a friendly conversation during the meals. Its not easy to find a topic. Talking of home is painful. Talking of the present unbearable. One day, Peeta empties our breadbasket and points out how they have been careful to

include types from the districts along with the refined bread of the Capitol. The fish-shaped loaf tinted green with seaweed from District 4. The crescent moon roll dotted with seeds from District 11. Somehow, although its made from the same stuff, it looks a lot more appetizing than the ugly drop biscuits that are the standard fare at home. And there you have it, says Peeta, scooping the breads back in the basket. You certainly know a lot, I say. Only about bread, he says. Okay, now laugh as if Ive said something funny. We both give a somewhat convincing laugh and ignore the stares from around the room. All right, Ill keep smiling pleasantly and you talk, says Peeta. Its wearing us both out, Haymitchs direction to be friendly. Because ever since I slammed my door, theres been a chill in the air between us. But we have our orders. Did I ever tell you about the time I was chased by a bear? I

ask. No, but it sounds fascinating, says Peeta. I try and animate my face as I recall the event, a true story, in which Id foolishly challenged a black bear over the rights to a beehive. Peeta laughs and asks questions right on cue. Hes much better at this than I am. On the second day, while were taking a shot at spear throwing, he whispers to me. I think we have a shadow. I throw my spear, which Im not too bad at actually, if I dont have to throw too far, and see the little girl from District 11 standing back a bit, watching us. Shes the twelve-year-old, the one who reminded me so of Prim in stature. Up close she looks about ten. She has bright, dark, eyes and satiny brown skin and stands tilted up on her toes with her arms slightly extended to her sides, as if ready to take wing at the slightest sound. Its impossible not to think of a bird. I pick up another spear while Peeta throws. I think her names Rue, he says softly. I bite my lip. Rue is a small yellow flower that grows in the Meadow. Rue. Primrose. Neither of them could tip the scale at seventy pounds soaking wet. What can we do about it? I ask him, more harshly than I intended. Nothing to do, he says back. Just making conversation. Now that I know shes there, its hard to ignore the child. She slips up and joins us at different stations. Like me, shes clever with plants, climbs swiftly, and has good aim. She can hit the target every time with a slingshot. But what is a slingshot against a 220-pound male with a sword? Back on the District 12 floor, Haymitch and Effie grill us throughout breakfast and dinner about every moment of the day. What we did, who watched us, how the other tributes size up.

Cinna and Portia arent around, so theres no one to add any sanity to the meals. Not that Haymitch and Effie are fighting anymore. Instead they seem to be of one mind, determined to whip us into shape. Full of endless directions about what we should do and not do in training. Peeta is more patient, but I become fed up and surly. When we finally escape to bed on the second night, Peeta mumbles, Someone ought to get Haymitch a drink. I make a sound that is somewhere between a snort and a laugh. Then catch myself. Its messing with my mind too much, trying to keep straight when were supposedly friends and when were not. At least when we get into the arena, Ill know where we stand. Dont. Dont lets pretend when theres no one around. All right, Katniss, he says tiredly. After that, we only talk in front of people. On the third day of training, they start to call us out of lunch for our private sessions with the Gamemakers. District by district, first the boy, then the girl tribute. As usual, District 12 is slated to go last. We linger in the dining room, unsure where else to go. No one comes back once they have left. As the room empties, the pressure to appear friendly lightens. By the time they call Rue, we are left alone. We sit in silence until they summon Peeta. He rises. Remember what Haymitch said

about being sure to throw the weights. The words come out of my mouth without permission. Thanks. I will, he says. You . . . Shoot straight. I nod. I dont know why I said anything at all. Although if Im going to lose, Id rather Peeta win than the others. Better for our district, for my mother and Prim. After about fifteen minutes, they call my name. I smooth my hair, set my shoulders back, and walk into the gymnasium. Instantly, I know Im in trouble. Theyve been here too long, the Gamemakers. Sat through twenty-three other demonstrations. Had too much to wine, most of them. Want more than anything to go home. Theres nothing I can do but continue with the plan. I walk to the archery station. Oh, the weapons! Ive been itching to get my hands on them for days! Bows made of wood and plastic and metal and materials I cant even name. Arrows with feathers cut in flawless uniform lines. I choose a bow, string it, and sling the matching quiver of arrows over my shoulder. Theres a shooting range, but its much too limited. Standard bulls-eyes and human silhouettes. I walk to the center of the gymnasium and pick my first target. The dummy used for knife practice. Even as I pull back on the bow I know something is wrong. The strings tighter than the one I use at home. The arrows more rigid. I miss

the dummy by a couple of inches and lose what little attention I had been commanding. For a moment, Im humiliated, then I head back to the bulls-eye. I shoot again and again until I get the feel of these new weapons. Back in the center of the gymnasium, I take my initial position and skewer the dummy right through the heart. Then I sever the rope that holds the sandbag for boxing, and the bag splits open as it slams to the ground. Without pausing, I shoulder-roll forward, come up on one knee, and send an arrow into one of the hanging lights high above the gymnasium floor. A shower of sparks bursts from the fixture. Its excellent shooting. I turn to the Gamemakers. A few are nodding approval, but the majority of them are fixated on a roast pig that has just arrived at their banquet table. Suddenly I am furious, that with my life on the line, they dont even have the decency to pay attention to me. That Im being upstaged by a dead pig. My heart starts to pound, I can feel my face burning. Without thinking, I pull an arrow from my quiver and send it straight at the Gamemakers table. I hear shouts of alarm as people stumble back. The arrow skewers the apple in the pigs mouth and pins it to the wall behind it. Everyone stares at me in disbelief. Thank you for your consideration, I say. Then I give a slight bow and walk

straight toward the exit without being dismissed.

8.

As I stride toward the elevator, I fling my bow to one side and my quiver to the other. I brush past the gaping Avoxes who guard the elevators and hit the number twelve button with my fist. The doors slide together and I zip upward. I actually make it back to my floor before the tears start running down my

cheeks. I can hear the others calling me from the sitting room, but I fly down the hall into my room, bolt the door, and fling myself onto my bed. Then I really begin to sob. Now Ive done it! Now Ive ruined everything! If Id stood even a ghost of chance, it vanished when I sent that arrow flying at the Gamemakers. What will they do to me now? Arrest me? Execute me? Cut my tongue and turn me into an Avox so I can wait on the future tributes of Panem? What was I thinking, shooting at the Gamemakers? Of course, I wasnt, I was shooting at that apple because I was so angry

at being ignored. I wasnt trying to kill one of them. If I were, theyd be dead! Oh, what does it matter? Its not like I was going to win the Games anyway. Who cares what they do to me? What really scares me is what they might do to my mother and Prim, how my family might suffer now because of my impulsiveness. Will they take their few belongings, or send my mother to prison and Prim to the community home, or kill them? They wouldnt kill them, would they? Why not? What do they care? I should have stayed and apologized. Or laughed, like it was a big joke. Then maybe I would have found some leniency. But instead I stalked out of the place in the most disrespectful manner possible. Haymitch and Effie are knocking on my door. I shout for them to go away and eventually they do. It takes at least an hour for me to cry myself out. Then I just lay curled up on the bed, stroking the silken sheets, watching the sun set over the artificial candy Capitol. At first, I expect guards to come for me. But as time passes, it seems less likely. I calm down. They still need a girl tribute from District 12, dont they? If the Gamemakers want to punish me, they can do it publicly. Wait until Im in the arena and sic starving wild animals on me. You can bet theyll make sure I dont have a bow and arrow to defend myself. Before that though, theyll give me a score so low, no one in their right mind would sponsor me. Thats what will happen tonight. Since the training isnt open to viewers, the Gamemakers announce a score for each player. It gives the audience a starting place for the betting that will continue throughout the Games. The number, which is between one and twelve, one being irredeemably bad and twelve being unattainably high, signifies the promise of the tribute. The mark is not a guarantee of which person will win. Its only an indication of the potential a tribute showed in training. Often, because of the variables in the actual arena, high-scoring tributes go down almost immediately. And a few years ago, the boy who won the Games only received a three. Still, the scores can help or hurt an individual tribute in terms of sponsorship. I had been hoping my shooting skills might get me a six or a seven, even if Im not particularly powerful. Now Im sure Ill have the lowest score of the twenty-four. If no one sponsors me, my odds of staying alive decrease to almost zero. When Effie taps on the door to

call me to dinner, I decide I may as well go. The scores will be televised tonight. Its not like I can hide what happened forever. I go to the bathroom and wash my face,

but its still red and splotchy. Everyones waiting at the table, even Cinna and Portia. I wish the stylists hadnt shown up because for some reason, I dont like the idea of disappointing them. Its as if Ive thrown away all the good work they did on the opening ceremonies without a thought. I avoid looking at anyone as I take tiny spoonfuls of fish soup. The saltiness reminds me of my tears. The adults begin some chitchat about the weather forecast, and I let my eyes meet Peetas. He raises his eyebrows. A question. What happened? I just give my head a small shake. Then, as theyre serving the main course, I hear Haymitch say, Okay, enough small talk, just how bad were you today? Peeta jumps in. I dont know that it mattered. By the time I showed up, no one even bothered to look at me. They were singing some kind of drinking song, I think. So, I threw around some heavy objects until they told me I could go. That makes me feel a bit better. Its not like Peeta attacked the Gamemakers, but at least he was provoked, too. And you, sweetheart? says Haymitch. Somehow Haymitch calling me sweetheart ticks me off enough that Im at least able to speak. I shot an arrow at the Gamemakers. Everyone stops eating. You what? The horror in Effies voice confirms my worse suspicions. I shot an arrow at them. Not exactly at them. In their direction. Its like Peeta said, I was shooting and they were ignoring me and I just . . . I just lost my head, so I shot an apple out of their stupid roast pigs mouth! I say defiantly. And what did they say? says Cinna carefully. Nothing. Or I dont know. I walked out after that, I say. Without being dismissed? gasps Effie. I dismissed myself, I said. I remember how I promised Prim that I really would try to win and I feel like a ton of coal has dropped on me. Well, thats that, says Haymitch. Then he butters a roll. Do you think theyll arrest me? I ask. Doubt it. Be a pain to replace you at this stage, says Haymitch. What about my family? I say. Will they punish them? Dont think so. Wouldnt make much sense. See theyd have to reveal what happened in the Training Center for it to have any worthwhile effect on the population. People would need to know what you did. But they cant since its secret, so itd be a waste of effort, says Haymitch. More likely theyll make your life hell in the arena. Well, theyve already promised to do that to us any way, says Peeta. Very true, says Haymitch. And I realize the impossible has happened. They have actually cheered me up. Haymitch picks up a pork chop with his fingers, which makes Effie frown, and dunks it in his wine. He rips off a hunk of meat and starts to chuckle.

What were their faces like? I can feel the edges of my mouth tilting up. Shocked. Terrified. Uh, ridiculous, some of them. An image pops into my mind. One man tripped

backward into a bowl of punch. Haymitch guffaws and we all start laughing except Effie, although even she is suppressing a smile. Well, it serves them right. Its their job to pay attention to you. And just because you come from District Twelve is no excuse to ignore you. Then her eyes dart around as if shes said something totally outrageous. Im sorry, but thats what I think, she says to no one in particular. Ill get a very bad score, I say. Scores only matter if theyre very good, no one pays much attention to the bad or mediocre ones. For all they know, you could be hiding your talents to get a low score on purpose. People use that strategy, said Portia. I hope thats how people interpret the four Ill probably get, says Peeta. If that. Really, is anything less impressive than watching a person pick up a heavy ball and throw it a couple of yards. One almost landed on my foot. I grin at him and realize that Im starving. I cut off a piece of pork, dunk it in mashed potatoes, and start eating. Its okay. My family is safe. And if they are safe, no real harm has been done. After dinner, we go to sitting room to watch the scores announced on television. First they show a photo of the tribute, then flash their score below it. The Career Tributes naturally get in the eight-to-ten range. Most of the other players average a five. Surprisingly, little Rue comes up with a seven. I dont know what she showed the judges, but shes so tiny it must have been impressive. District 12 comes up last, as usual. Peeta pulls an eight so at least a couple of the Gamemakers must have been watching him. I dig my fingernails into my palms as my face comes up, expecting the worst. Then theyre flashing the number eleven on the screen. Eleven! Effie Trinket lets out a squeal, and everybody is slapping me on the back and cheering and congratulating me. But it doesnt seem real. There must be a mistake. How . . . How could that happen? I ask Haymitch. Guess they liked your temper, he says. Theyve got a show to put on. They need some players with some heat. Katniss, the girl who was on fire, says Cinna and gives me a hug. Oh, wait until you see your interview dress. More flames? I ask. Of a sort, he says mischievously. Peeta and I congratulate each other, another awkward moment. Weve both done well, but what does that

mean for the other? I escape to my room as quickly as possible and burrow down under the covers. The stress of the day, particularly the crying, has worn me out. I drift off, reprieved, relieved, and with the number eleven still flashing behind my eyelids. At dawn, I lie in bed for a while, watching the sun come up on a beautiful morning. Its Sunday. A day off at home. I wonder if Gale is in the woods yet. Usually we devote all of Sunday to stocking up for the week. Rising early, hunting and gathering, then trading at the Hob. I think of Gale without me. Both of us can hunt alone, but were better as a pair. Particularly if were trying for bigger game. But also in the

littler things, having a partner lightened the load, could even make the arduous task of filling my familys table enjoyable. I had been struggling along on my own for about six months when I first ran into Gale in the woods. It was a Sunday in October, the air cool and pungent with dying things. Id spent the morning competing with the squirrels for nuts and the slightly warmer afternoon wading in shallow ponds harvesting Katniss. The only meat Id shot was a squirrel that had practically run over my toes in its quest for acorns, but the animals would still be afoot when the snow buried my other food sources. Having strayed farther afield than usual, I was hurrying back home, lugging my burlap sacks when I came across a dead rabbit. It was hanging by its neck in a thin wire a foot above my head. About fifteen yards away was another. I recognized the twitch-up snares because my father had used them. When the prey is caught, its yanked into the air out of the reach of other hungry animals. Id been trying to use snares all summer with no success, so I couldnt help dropping my sacks to examine this one. My fingers were just on the wire above one of the rabbits when a voice rang out. Thats dangerous. I jumped back several feet as Gale materialized from behind a tree. He must have been watching me the whole time. He was only fourteen, but he cleared six feet and was as good as an adult to me. Id seen him around the Seam and at school. And one other time. Hed lost his father in the same blast that killed mine. In January, Id stood by while he received his medal of valor in the Justice Building, another oldest child with no father. I remembered his two little brothers clutching his mother, a woman whose swollen belly announced she was just days away from giving birth. Whats your name? he said, coming over and

disengaging the rabbit from the snare. He had another three hanging from his belt. Katniss, I said, barely audible. Well, Catnip, stealings punishable by death, or hadnt you heard? he said. Katniss, I said louder. And I wasnt stealing it. I just wanted to look at your snare. Mine never catch anything. He scowled at me, not convinced. So whered you get the squirrel? I shot it. I pulled my bow off my shoulder. I was still using the small version my father had made me, but Id been practicing with the full-size one when I could. I was hoping that by spring I might be able to bring down some bigger game. Gales eyes fastened on the bow. Can I see that? I handed it over. Just remember, stealings punishable by death. That was the first time I ever saw him smile. It transformed him from someone menacing to someone you wished you knew. But it took several months before I returned that smile. We talked hunting then. I told him I might be able to get him a bow if he had something to trade. Not food. I wanted knowledge. I wanted to set my own snares that caught a belt of fat rabbits in one day. He agreed something might be worked out. As the seasons went by, we grudgingly began to share our knowledge, our weapons, our secret places that were thick with wild plums or turkeys. He taught me snares and fishing. I showed him what plants to eat and eventually gave him one of our precious bows. And then one day, without either of us saying it, we became a team. Dividing the work and the spoils. Making sure that both our families had food. Gale gave me a sense of security Id lacked since my fathers death. His companionship replaced the long solitary hours in the woods. I became a much better hunter when I didnt have to look over my shoulder constantly, when someone was watching my back. But he turned into so much more than a hunting partner. He became my confidante, someone with whom I could share thoughts I could never voice inside the fence. In exchange, he trusted me with his. Being out in the woods with Gale . . . Sometimes I was actually happy. I call him my friend, but in the last year its seemed too casual a word for what Gale is to me. A pang of longing shoots through my chest. If only he was with me now! But, of course, I dont want that. I dont want him in the arena where hed be dead in a few days. I just . . . I just miss him. And I hate being so alone. Does he miss me? He must. I think of the eleven flashing under my name last night. I know exactly what hed say to

me. Well, theres some room for improvement there. And then hed give me a smile and Id return it without hesitating now. I cant help comparing what I have with Gale to what Im pretending to have with Peeta. How I never question Gales motives while I do nothing but doubt the latters. Its not a fair comparison really. Gale and I were thrown together by a mutual need to survive. Peeta and I know the others survival means our own death. How do you sidestep that? Effies knocking at the door, reminding me theres another big, big, big day! ahead. Tomorrow night will be our televised interviews. I guess the whole team will have their hands full readying us for that. I get up and take a quick shower, being a bit more careful about the buttons I hit, and head down to the dining room. Peeta, Effie, and Haymitch are huddled around the table talking in hushed voices. That seems odd, but hunger wins out over curiosity and I load up my plate with breakfast before I join them. The stews made with tender chunks of lamb and dried plums today. Perfect on the bed of wild rice. Ive shoveled about halfway through the mound when I realize no ones talking. I take a big gulp of orange juice and wipe my mouth. So, whats going on? Youre coaching us on interviews today, right? Thats right, says Haymitch. You dont have to wait until Im done. I can listen and cat at the same time, I say. Well, theres been a change of plans. About our current approach, says Haymitch. Whats that? I ask. Im not sure what our current approach is. Trying to appear mediocre in front of the other tributes is the last bit of strategy I remember. Haymitch shrugs. Peeta has asked to be coached

separately.

9.

Betrayal.

Thats the first thing I feel, which is ludicrous. For there to be betrayal, there would have had to been trust first. Between Peeta and me. And trust has not been part of the agreement. Were tributes. But the boy who risked a beating to give me bread, the one who steadied me in the chariot, who covered for me with the

redheaded Avox girl, who insisted Haymitch know my hunting skills . . . Was there some part of me that couldnt help trusting him? On the other hand, Im relieved that we can stop the pretense of being friends. Obviously, whatever thin connection wed foolishly formed has been severed. And high time, too. The Games begin in two days, and trust will only be a weakness. Whatever triggered Peetas decision and I suspect it had to do with my outperforming him in training I should be nothing but grateful for it. Maybe hes finally accepted the fact that the sooner we openly acknowledge that we are enemies, the better. Good, I say. So whats the schedule? Youll each have four hours with Effie for presentation and four with me for content, says Haymitch. You start with Effie, Katniss. I cant imagine what Effie will have to teach me that could take four hours, but shes got me working down to the last minute. We go to my rooms and she puts me in a full-length gown and high-heeled shoes, not the ones Ill he wearing for the actual interview, and instructs me on walking. The shoes are the worst part. Ive never worn high heels and cant get used to essentially wobbling around on the balls of my feet. But Effie runs around in them full-time, and Im determined that if she can do it, so can I. The dress poses anotherproblem. It keeps tangling around my shoes so, of course, I hitch it up, and then Effie swoops down on me like a hawk, smacking my hands and yelling, Not above the ankle! When I finally conquer walking, theres still sitting, posture apparently I have a tendency to duck my head eye contact, hand gestures, and smiling. Smiling is mostly about smiling more. Effie makes me say a hundred banal phrases starting with a smile, while smiling, or ending with a smile. By lunch, the muscles in my cheeks are twitching from overuse. Well, thats the best I can do, Effie says with a sigh. Just remember, Katniss, you want the audience to like you. And you dont think they will? I ask. Not if you glare at them the entire time. Why dont you save that for the arena? Instead, think of yourself among friends, says Effie. Theyre betting on how long Ill live! I burst out. Theyre not my friends! Well, try and pretend! snaps Effie. Then she composes herself and beams at me. See, like this. Im smiling at you even though youre aggravating me. Yes, it feels very convincing, I say. Im going to eat. 1 kick off my heels and stomp down to the dining room, hiking my skirt up to my thighs. Peeta and Haymitch seem in pretty good moods, so Im thinking the content session should be an improvement over the morning. I couldnt be more wrong. After lunch,

Haymitch takes me into the

sitting room, directs me to the couch, and then just frowns at me for a while. What? I finally ask. Im trying to figure out what to do with you, he says. How were going to present you. Are you going to be charming? Aloof? Fierce? So far, youre shining like a star. You volunteered to save your sister. Cinna made you look unforgettable. Youve got the top training score. People are intrigued, but no one knows who you are. The impression you make tomorrow will decide exactly what I can get you in terms of sponsors, says Haymitch. Having watched the tribute interviews all my life, I know theres truth to what hes saying. If you appeal to the crowd, either by being humorous or brutal or eccentric, you gain favor. Whats Peetas approach? Or am I not allowed to ask? I say. Likable. He has a sort of self-deprecating humor naturally, says Haymitch. Whereas when you open your mouth, you come across more as sullen and hostile. I do not! I say. Please. I dont know where you pulled that cheery, wavy girl on the chariot from, but I havent seen her before or since, says Haymitch. And youve given me so many reasons to be cheery, I counter.But you dont have to please me. Im not going to sponsor you. So pretend Im the audience, says Haymitch. Delight me. Fine! I snarl. Haymitch takes the role of the interviewer and I try to answer his questions in a winning fashion. But I cant. Im too angry with Haymitch for what he said and that I even have to answer the questions. All I can think is how unjust the whole thing is, the Hunger Games. Why am I hopping around like some trained dog trying to please people I hate? The longer the interview goes on, the more my fury seems to rise to the surface, until Im literally spitting out answers at him. All right, enough, he says. Weve got to find another angle. Not only are you hostile, I dont know anything about you. Ive asked you fifty questions and still have no sense of your life, your family, what you care about. They want to know about you, Katniss. But I dont want them to! Theyre already taking my future! They cant have the things that mattered to me in the past! I say. Then lie! Make something up! says Haymitch. Im not good at lying, I say. Well, you better learn fast. Youve got about as much charm as a dead slug, says Haymitch. Ouch. That hurts. Even Haymitch must know hes been too harsh because his voice softens. Heres an idea. Try acting humble. Humble, I echo. That you cant believe a little girl from District

Twelve has done this well. The whole things been more than you ever could have dreamed of. Talk about Cinnas clothes. How nice the people are. How the city amazes you. If you wont talk about yourself, at least compliment the audience. Just keep turning it back around, all right. Gush. The next hours are agonizing. At once, its clear I cannot gush. We try me playing cocky, but I just dont have the arrogance. Apparently, Im too vulnerable for ferocity. Im not witty. Funny. Sexy. Or mysterious. By the end of the

session, I am no one at all. Haymitch started drinking somewhere around witty, and a nasty edge has crept into his voice. I give up, sweetheart. Just answer the questions and try not to let the audience see how openly you despise them. I have dinner that night in my room, ordering an outrageous number of delicacies, eating myself sick, and then taking out my anger at Haymitch, at the Hunger Games, at every living being in the Capitol by smashing dishes around my room. When the girl with the red hair comes in to turn down my bed, her eyes widen at the mess. Just leave it! I yell at her. Just leave it alone! I hate her, too, with her knowing reproachful eyes that call me a coward, a monster, a puppet of the Capitol, both now and then. For her, justice must finally be happening. At least my death will help pay for the life of the boy in the woods. But instead of fleeing the room, the girl closes the door behind her and goes to the bathroom. She comes back with a damp cloth and wipes my face gently then cleans the blood from a broken plate off my hands. Why is she doing this? Why am I letting her? I should have tried to save you, I whisper. She shakes her head. Does this mean we were right to stand by? That she has forgiven me? No, it was wrong, I say. She taps her lips with her fingers then points to my chest. I think she means that I would just have ended up an Avox, too. Probably would have. An Avox or dead. I spend the next hour helping the redheaded girl clean the room. When all the garbage has been dropped down a disposal and the food cleaned away, she turns down my bed. I crawl in between the sheets like a five-year-old and let her tuck me in. Then she goes. I want her to stay until I fall asleep. To be there when I wake up. I want the protection of this girl, even though she never had mine. In the morning, its not the girl but my prep team who are hanging over me. My lessons with Effie and Haymitch are over. This day belongs to Cinna. Hes my last hope. Maybe he

can make me look so wonderful, no one will care what comes out of my mouth. The team works on me until late afternoon, turning my skin to glowing satin, stenciling patterns on my arms, painting flame designs on my twenty perfect nails. Then Venia goes to work on my hair, weaving strands of red into a pattern that begins at my left ear, wraps around my head, and then falls in one braid down my right shoulder. They erase my face with a layer of pale makeup and draw my features back out. Huge dark eyes, full red lips, lashes that throw off bits of light when I blink. Finally, they cover my entire body in a powder that makes me shimmer in gold dust. Then Cinna enters with what I assume is my dress, but I cant really see it because its covered. Close your eyes, he orders. I can feel the silken inside as they slip it down over my naked body, then the weight. It must be forty pounds. I clutch Octavias hand as I blindly step into my shoes, glad to find they are at least two inches lower than

the pair Effie had me practice in. Theres some adjusting and fidgeting. Then silence. Can I open my eyes? I ask. Yes, says Cinna. Open them. The creature standing before me in the full-length mirror has come from another world. Where skin shimmers and eyes flash and apparently they make their clothes from jewels. Because my dress, oh, my dress is entirely covered in reflective precious gems, red and yellow and white with bits of blue that accent the tips of the flame design. The slightest movement gives the impression I am engulfed in tongues of fire. I am not pretty. I am not beautiful. I am as radiant as the sun. For a while, we all just stare at me. Oh, Cinna, I finally whisper. Thank you. Twirl for me, he says. I hold out my arms and spin in a circle. The prep team screams in admiration. Cinna dismisses the team and has me move around in the dress and shoes, which are infinitely more manageable than Effies. The dress hangs in such a way that I dont have to lift the skirt when I walk, leaving me with one less thing to worry about. So, all ready for the interview then? asks Cinna. I can see by his expression that hes been talking to Haymitch. That he knows how dreadful I am. Im awful. Haymitch called me a dead slug. No matter what we tried, I couldnt do it. I just cant be one of those people he wants me to be, I say. Cinna thinks about this a moment. Why dont you just be yourself? Myself? Thats no good, either. Haymitch says Im sullen and hostile, I say. Well, you are . . . Around Haymitch, says Cinna with a grin. I dont find you so. The

prep team adores you. You even won over the Gamemakers. And as for the citizens of the Capitol, well, they cant stop talking about you. No one can help but admire your spirit. My spirit. This is a new thought. Im not sure exactly what it means, but it suggests Im a fighter. In a sort of brave way. Its not as if Im never friendly. Okay, maybe I dont go around loving everybody I meet, maybe my smiles are hard to come by, but I do care for some people. Cinna takes my icy hands in his warm ones. Suppose, when you answer the questions, you think youre addressing a friend back home. Who would your best friend be? asks Cinna. Gale, I say instantly. Only it doesnt make sense, Cinna. I would never be telling Gale those things about me. He already knows them. What about me? Could you think of me as a friend? asks Cinna. Of all the people Ive met since I left home, Cinna is by far my favorite. I liked him right off and he hasnt disappointed me yet. I think so, but Ill be sitting on the main platform with the other stylists. Youll be able to look right at me. When youre asked a question, find me, and answer it as honestly as possible, says Cinna. Even if what I think is horrible? I ask. Because it might be, really. Especially if what you think is horrible, says Cinna. Youll try it? I nod. Its a plan. Or at least a straw to grasp at.

Too soon its time to go. The interviews take place on a stage constructed in front of the

Training Center. Once I leave my room, it will be only minutes until Im in front of the crowd, the cameras, all of Panem. As Cinna turns the doorknob, I stop his hand. Cinna . . . Im completely overcome with stage fright. Remember, they already love you, he says gently. Just be yourself. We meet up with the rest of the District 12 crowd at the elevator. Portia and her gang have been hard at work. Peeta looks striking in a black suit with flame accents. While we look well together, its a relief not to be dressed identically. Haymitch and Effie are all fancied up for the occasion. I avoid Haymitch, but accept Effies compliments. Effie can be tiresome and clueless, but shes not destructive like Haymitch. When the elevator opens, the other tributes are being lined up to take the stage. All twenty-four of us sit in a big arc throughout the interviews. Ill be last, or second to last since the girl tribute precedes the boy from each district. How I wish I could be first and get the whole thing out of the way! Now Ill have to listen to how witty, funny, humble, fierce, and charming everybody

else is before I go up. Plus, the audience will start to get bored, just as the Gamemakers did. And I cant exactly shoot an arrow into the crowd to get their attention. Right before we parade onto the stage, Haymitch comes up behind Peeta and me and growls, Remember, youre still a happy pair. So act like it. What? I thought we abandoned that when Peeta asked for separate coaching. But I guess that was a private, not a public thing. Anyway, theres not much chance for interaction now, as we walk single-file to our seats and take our places. Just stepping on the stage makes my breathing rapid and shallow. I can feel my pulse pounding in my temples. Its a relief to get to my chair, because between the heels and my legs shaking, Im afraid Ill trip. Although evening is falling, the City Circle is brighter than a summers day. An elevated seating unit has been set up for prestigious guests, with the stylists commanding the front row. The cameras will turn to them when the crowd is reacting to their handiwork. A large balcony off a building to the right has been reserved for the Gamemakers. Television crews have claimed most of the other balconies. But the City Circle and the avenues that feed into it are completely packed with people. Standing room only. At homes and community halls around the country, every television set is turned on. Every citizen of Panem is tuned in. There will be no blackouts tonight. Caesar Flickerman, the man who has hosted the interviews for more than forty years, bounces onto the stage. Its a little scary because his appearance has been virtually unchanged during all that time. Same face under a coating of pure white makeup. Same hairstyle that he dyes a different color for each Hunger Games. Same ceremonial suit, midnight blue dotted with a thousand tiny electric bulbs that twinkle like stars. They do surgery in the Capitol, to make people appear

younger and thinner. In District 12, looking old is something of an achievement since so many people die early. You see an elderly person you want to congratulate them on their longevity, ask the secret of survival. A plump person is envied because they arent scraping by like the majority of us. But here it is different. Wrinkles arent desirable. A round belly isnt a sign of success. This year, Caesars hair is powder blue and his eyelids and lips are coated in the same hue. He looks freakish but less frightening than he did last year when his color was crimson and he seemed to be

bleeding. Caesar tells a few jokes to warm up the audience but then gets down to business. The girl tribute from District 1, looking provocative in a see-through gold gown, steps up the center of the stage to join Caesar for her interview. You can tell her mentor didnt have any trouble coming up with an angle for her. With that flowing blonde hair, emerald green eyes, her body tall and lush . . . Shes sexy all the way. Each interview only lasts three minutes. Then a buzzer goes off and the next tribute is up. Ill say this for Caesar, he really does his best to make the tributes shine. Hes friendly, tries to set the nervous ones at ease, laughs at lame jokes, and can turn a weak response into a memorable one by the way he reacts. I sit like a lady, the way Effie showed me, as the districts slip by. 2, 3, 4. Everyone seems to be playing up some angle. The monstrous boy from District 2 is a ruthless killing machine. The fox-faced girl from District 5 sly and elusive. I spotted Cinna as soon as he took his place, but even his presence cannot relax me. 8, 9, 10. The crippled boy from 10 is very quiet. My palms are sweating like crazy, but the jeweled dress isnt absorbent and they skid right of if I try to dry them. 11. Rue, who is dressed in a gossamer gown complete with wings, flutters her way to Caesar. A hush falls over the crowd at the sight of this magical wisp of a tribute. Caesars very sweet with her, complimenting her seven in training, an excellent score for one so small. When he asks her what her greatest strength in the arena will be, she doesnt hesitate. Im very hard to catch, she says in a tremulous voice. And if they cant catch me, they cant kill me. So dont count me out. I wouldnt in a million years, says Caesar encouragingly. The boy tribute from District 11, Thresh, has the same dark skin as Rue, but the resemblance stops there. Hes one of the giants, probably six and a half feet tall and built like an ox, but I noticed he rejected the invitations from the Career Tributes to join their crowd. Instead hes been very solitary, speaking to no one, showing little interest in training. Even so, he scored a ten and its not hard to imagine he impressed the Gamemakers. He ignores Caesars attempts at banter and answers with a yes or no or just remains silent. If only I was his size, I could get away with sullen and hostile and it would be just fine! I bet half the

sponsors are at least considering him. If I had any money, Id bet on him myself. And then theyre calling Katniss Everdeen, and I feel myself, as if in a dream,

standing and making my way center stage. I shake Caesars outstretched hand, and he has the good grace not to immediately wipe his off on his suit. So, Katniss, the Capitol must be quite a change from District Twelve. Whats impressed you most since you arrived here? asks Caesar. What? What did he say? Its as if the words make no sense. My mouth has gone as dry as sawdust. I desperately find Cinna in the crowd and lock eyes with him. I imagine the words coming from his lips. Whats impressed you most since you arrived here? I rack my brain for something that made me happy here. Be honest, I think. Be honest. The lamb stew, I get out. Caesar laughs, and vaguely I realize some of the audience has joined in. The one with the dried plums? asks Caesar. I nod. Oh, I eat it by the bucketful. He turns sideways to the audience in horror, hand on his stomach. It doesnt show, does it? They shout reassurances to him and applaud. This is what I mean about Caesar. He tries to help you out. Now, Katniss, he says confidentially, When you came out in the opening ceremonies, my heart actually stopped. What did you think of that costume? Cinna raises one eyebrow at me. Be honest. You mean after I got over my fear of being burned alive? I ask. Big laugh. A real one from the audience. Yes. Start then, says Caesar. Cinna, my friend, I should tell him anyway. I thought Cinna was brilliant and it was the most gorgeous costume Id ever seen and I couldnt believe I was wearing it. I cant believe Im wearing this, either. I lift up my skirt to spread it out. I mean, look at it! As the audience oohs and ahs, I see Cinna make the tiniest circular motion with his finger. But I know what hes saying. Twirl for me. I spin in a circle once and the reaction is immediate. Oh, do that again! says Caesar, and so I lift up my arms and spin around and around letting the skirt fly out, letting the dress engulf me in flames. The audience breaks into cheers. When I stop, I clutch Caesars arm. Dont stop! he says. I have to, Im dizzy! Im also giggling, which I think Ive done maybe never in my lifetime. But the nerves and the spinning have gotten to me. Caesar wraps a protective arm around me. Dont worry, Ive got you. Cant have you following in your mentors footsteps. Everyones hooting as the cameras find Haymitch, who is by now famous for his head dive at the reaping, and he waves them away good-naturedly and points back to me. Its all right, Caesar reassures the crowd. Shes safe with me. So, how about that training score. E-le-ven. Give us a hint what happened in there. I glance at the Gamemakers on the balcony and bite my lip. Um . . . All I can say, is I

think it was a first. The cameras are right on the Gamemakers, who are chuckling and nodding. Youre killing us, says Caesar as if in actual pain. Details. Details. I address the

balcony. Im not supposed to talk about it, right? The Gamemaker who fell in the punch bowl shouts out, Shes not! Thank you, I say. Sorry. My lips are sealed. Lets go back then, to the moment they called your sisters name at the reaping, says Caesar. His mood is quieter now. And you volunteered. Can you tell us about her? No. No, not all of you. But maybe Cinna. I dont think Im imagining the sadness on his face. Her names Prim. Shes just twelve. And I love her more than anything. You could hear a pin drop in the City Circle now. What did she say to you? After the reaping? Caesar asks. Be honest. Be honest. I swallow hard. She asked me to try really hard to win. The audience is frozen, hanging on my every word. And what did you say? prompts Caesar gently. But instead of warmth, I feel an icy rigidity take over my body. My muscles tense as they do before a kill. When I speak, my voice seems to have dropped an octave. I swore I would. I bet you did, says Caesar, giving me a squeeze. The buzzer goes off. Sorry were out of time. Best of luck, Katniss Everdeen, tribute from District Twelve. The applause continues long after Im seated. I look to Cinna for reassurance. He gives me a subtle thumbs-up. Im still in a daze for the first part of Peetas interview. He has the audience from the get-go, though; I can hear them laughing, shouting out. He plays up the bakers son thing, comparing the tributes to the breads from their districts. Then has a funny anecdote about the perils of the Capitol showers. Tell me, do I still smell like roses? he asks Caesar, and then theres a whole run where they take turns sniffing each other that brings down the house. Im coming back into focus when Caesar asks him if he has a girlfriend back home. Peeta hesitates, then gives an unconvincing shake of his head. Handsome lad like you. There must be some special girl. Come on, whats her name? says Caesar. Peeta sighs. Well, there is this one girl. Ive had a crush on her ever since I can remember. But Im pretty sure she didnt know I was alive until the reaping. Sounds of sympathy from the crowd. Unrequited love they can relate to. She have another fellow? asks Caesar. I dont know, but a lot of boys like her, says Peeta. So, heres what you do. You win, you go home. She cant turn you down then, eh? says Caesar

encouragingly. I dont think its going to work out. Winning . . . Wont help in my case, says Peeta. Why ever not? says Caesar, mystified. Peeta blushes beet red and stammers out. Because . . . Because . . . She came here with me.

PART II"THE GAMES"

10.

For a moment, the cameras hold on Peetas downcast eyes as what he says sinks in. Then I can see my face, mouth half open in a mix of surprise and protest, magnified on every screen as I realize, Me! He means me! I press my lips together and stare at the floor, hoping this will conceal the emotions starting to boil up inside of me. Oh, that is a piece of bad luck, says Caesar, and theres a real edge of pain in his voice. The crowd is murmuring in agreement, a few have even given agonized cries. Its not good, agrees Peeta. Well, I dont think any of us can blame you. Itd be hard not to fall for that young lady, says Caesar. She didnt know? Peeta shakes his head. Not until now. I allow my eyes to flicker up to the screen long enough to see that the blush on my cheeks is unmistakable. Wouldnt you love to pull her back out here and get a response? Caesar asks the audience. The crowd screams assent. Sadly, rules are rules, and Katniss Everdeens time has been spent. Well, best of luck to you, Peeta Mellark, and I think I speak for all of Panem when I say our hearts go with yours. The roar of the crowd is deafening. Peeta has absolutely wiped the rest of us off the map with his declaration of love for me. When the audience finally settles down, he chokes out a quiet Thank you and returns to his seat. We stand for the anthem. I have to raise my head out of the required respect and cannot avoid seeing that every screen is now dominated by a shot of Peeta and me, separated by a few feet that in the viewers heads can never be breached. Poor tragic us. But I know better. After the anthem, the tributes file back into the Training Center lobby and onto the elevators. I make sure to veer into a car that does not contain Peeta. The crowd slows our entourages of stylists and mentors and chaperones, so we have only each other for company. No one speaks. My elevator stops to deposit four tributes before I am alone and then find the doors opening on the twelfth floor. Peeta has only just stepped from his car when

I slam my palms into his chest. He loses his balance and crashes into an ugly urn filled with fake flowers. The urn tips and shatters into hundreds of tiny pieces. Peeta lands in the shards, and blood immediately flows from his hands. What was that for? he says, aghast. You had no right! No right to go saying those things about me! I shout at him. Now the elevators open and the whole crew is there, Effie, Haymitch, Cinna, and Portia. Whats going on? says Effie, a note of hysteria in her voice. Did you fall? After she shoved me, says Peeta as Effie and Cinna help him up. Haymitch turns on me. Shoved him? This was your idea, wasnt it? Turning me into some kind of fool in front of the entire country? I answer. It was my idea, says Peeta, wincing as he pulls spikes of pottery from his palms. Haymitch just helped me with it. Yes, Haymitch is very helpful. To you! I say. You are a fool, Haymitch says in disgust. Do you think he hurt you? That boy just gave you

something you could never achieve on your own. He made me look weak! I say. He made you look desirable! And lets face it, you can use all the help you can get in that department. You were about as romantic as dirt until he said he wanted you.

Now they all do. Youre all theyre talking about. The star-crossed lovers from District Twelve! says Haymitch. But were not star-crossed lovers! I say. Haymitch grabs my shoulders and pins me against the wall. Who cares? Its all a big show. Its all how youre perceived. The most I could say about you after your interview was that you were nice enough, although that in itself was a small miracle. Now I can say youre a heartbreaker. Oh, oh, oh, how the boys back home fall longingly at your feet. Which do you think will get you more sponsors? The smell of wine on his breath makes me sick. I shove his hands off my shoulders and step away, trying to clear my head. Cinna comes over and puts his arm around me. Hes right, Katniss. I dont know what to think. I should have been told, so I didnt look so stupid. No, your reaction was perfect. If youd known, it wouldnt have read as real, says Portia. Shes just worried about her boyfriend, says Peeta gruffly, tossing away a bloody piece of the urn. My cheeks burn again at the thought of Gale. I dont have a boyfriend. Whatever, says Peeta. But I bet hes smart enough to know a bluff when he sees it. Besides you didnt say you loved me. So what does it matter? The words are sinking in. My anger fading. Im torn now between thinking Ive been used and thinking Ive been given an

edge. Haymitch is right. I survived my interview, but what was I really? A silly girl spinning in a sparkling, dress. Giggling. The only moment of any substance I hail was when I talked about Prim. Compare that with Thresh, his silent, deadly power, and Im forgettable. Silly and sparkly and forgettable. No, not entirely forgettable, I have my eleven in training. But now Peeta has made me an object of love. Not just his. To hear him tell it I have many admirers. And if the audience really thinks were in love . . . I remember how strongly they responded to his confession. Star-crossed lovers. Haymitch is right, they eat that stuff up in the Capitol. Suddenly Im worried that I didnt react properly. After he said he loved me, did you think I could be in love with him, too? I ask. I did, says Portia. The way you avoided looking at the cameras, the blush. They others chime in, agreeing. Youre golden, sweetheart. Youre going to have sponsors lined up around the block, says Haymitch. Im embarrassed about my reaction. I force myself to acknowledge Peeta. Im sorry I shoved you. Doesnt matter, he shrugs. Although its technically illegal. Are your hands okay? I ask. Theyll be all right, he says. In the silence that follows, delicious smells of our dinner waft in from the dining room. Come on, lets eat, says Haymitch. We all follow him to the table and

take our places. But then Peeta is bleeding too heavily, and Portia

leads him off for medical treatment. We start the cream and rose-petal soup without them. By the time weve finished, theyre back. Peetas hands are wrapped in bandages. I cant help feeling guilty. Tomorrow we will be in the arena. He has done me a favor and I have answered with an injury. Will I never stop owing him? After dinner, we watch the replay in the sitting room. I seem frilly and shallow, twirling and giggling in my dress, although the others assure me I am charming. Peeta actually is charming and then utterly winning as the boy in love. And there I am, blushing and confused, made beautiful by Cinnas hands, desirable by Peetas confession, tragic by circumstance, and by all accounts, unforgettable. When the anthem finishes and the screen goes dark, a hush falls on the room. Tomorrow at dawn, we will be roused and prepared for the arena. The actual Games dont start until ten because so many of the Capitol residents rise late. But Peeta and I must make an early start. There is no telling how far we will travel to the arena that has been prepared for this years Games. I know Haymitch and Effie will not be going with us. As soon as they leave

here, theyll be at the Games Headquarters, hopefully madly signing up our sponsors, working out a strategy on how and when to deliver the gifts to us. Cinna and Portia will travel with us to the very spot from which we will be launched into the arena. Still final good-byes must be said here. Effie takes both of us by the hand and, with actual tears in her eyes, wishes us well. Thanks us for being the best tributes it has ever been her privilege to sponsor. And then, because its Effie and shes apparently required by law to say something awful, she adds I wouldnt be at all surprised if I finally get promoted to a decent district next year! Then she kisses us each on the cheek and hurries out, overcome with either the emotional parting or the possible improvement of her fortunes. Haymitch crosses his arms and looks us both over. Any final words of advice? asks Peeta. When the gong sounds, get the hell out of there. Youre neither of you up to the blood bath at the Cornucopia. Just clear out, put as much distance as you can between yourselves and the others, and find a source of water, he says. Got it? And after that? I ask. Stay alive, says Haymitch. Its the same advice he gave us on the train, but hes not drunk and laughing this time. And we only nod. What else is there to say? When I head to my room, Peeta lingers to

talk to Portia. Im glad. Whatever strange words of parting we exchange can wait until tomorrow. My covers are drawn back, but there is no sign of the redheaded Avox girl. I wish I knew her name. I should have asked it. She could write it down maybe. Or act it out. But perhaps that would only result in punishment for her. I take a shower and scrub the gold paint, the makeup, the scent of beauty from my body. All that remains of the design-teams efforts are the flames on my nails. I decide to

keep them as reminder of who I am to the audience. Katniss, the girl who was on fire. Perhaps it will give me something to hold on to in the days to come. I pull on a thick, fleecy nightgown and climb into bed. It takes me about five seconds to realize Ill never fall asleep. And I need sleep desperately because in the arena every moment I give in to fatigue will be an invitation to death. Its no good. One hour, two, three pass, and my eyelids refuse to get heavy. I cant stop trying to imagine exactly what terrain Ill be thrown into. Desert? Swamp? A frigid wasteland? Above all I am hoping for trees, which may afford me some means of concealment and food and shelter, Often there are trees because barren landscapes are dull and the Games resolve too

quickly without them. But what will the climate be like? What traps have the Gamemakers hid den to liven up the slower moments? And then there are my fellow tributes . . . The more anxious I am to find sleep, the more it eludes me. Finally, I am too restless to even stay in bed. I pace the floor, heart beating too fast, breathing too short. My room feels like a prison cell. If I dont get air soon, Im going to start to throw things again. I run down the hall to the door to the roof. Its not only unlocked but ajar. Perhaps someone forgot to close it, but it doesnt matter. The energy field enclosing the roof prevents any desperate form of escape. And Im not looking to escape, only to fill my lungs with air. I want to see the sky and the moon on the last night that no one will be hunting me. The roof is not lit at night, but as soon as my bare feel reach its tiled surface I see his silhouette, black against the lights that shine endlessly in the Capitol. Theres quite a commotion going on down in the streets, music and singing and car horns, none of which I could hear through the thick glass window panels in my room. I could slip away now, without him noticing me; he wouldnt hear me over the din, But the night airs so sweet, I cant bear returning to that stuffy cage of a room. And what difference does it make? Whether we speak or

not? My feet move soundlessly across the tiles. Im only yard behind him when I say, You should be getting some sleep. He starts but doesnt turn. I can see him give his head a slight shake. I didnt want to miss the party. Its for us, after all. I come up beside him and lean over the edge of the rail. The wide streets are full of dancing people. I squint to make out their tiny figures in more detail. Are they in costumes? Who could tell? Peeta answers. With all the crazy clothes they wear here. Couldnt sleep, either? Couldnt turn my mind off, I say. Thinking about your family? he asks. No, I admit a bit guiltily. All I can do is wonder about tomorrow. Which is pointless, of course. In the light from below, I can see his face now, the awkward way he holds his bandaged hands. I really am sorry about your hands. It doesnt matter, Katniss, he says. Ive never been a contender in these

Games anyway. Thats no way to be thinking, I say. Why not? Its true. My best hope is to not disgrace myself and . . . He hesitates. And what? I say. I dont know how to say it exactly. Only . . . I want to die as myself. Does that make any sense? he asks. I shake my head. How could he die as anyone but himself? I dont want them to change

me in there. Turn me into some kind of monster that Im not. I bite my lip feeling inferior. While Ive been ruminating on the availability of trees, Peeta has been struggling with how to maintain his identity. His purity of self. Do you mean you wont kill anyone? I ask. No, when the time comes, Im sure Ill kill just like everybody else. I cant go down without a fight. Only I keep wishing I could think of a way to . . . To show the Capitol they dont own me. That Im more than just a piece in their Games, says Peeta. But youre not, I say. None of us are. Thats how the Games work. Okay, but within that framework, theres still you, theres still me, he insists. Dont you see? A little. Only . . . No offense, but who cares, Peeta? I say. I do. I mean, what else am I allowed to care about at this point? he asks angrily. Hes locked those blue eyes on mine now, demanding an answer. I take a step back. Care about what Haymitch said. About staying alive. Peeta smiles at me, sad and mocking. Okay. Thanks for the tip, sweetheart. Its like a slap in the face. His use of Haymitchs patronizing endearment. Look, if you want to spend the last hours of your life planning some noble death in the arena, thats your choice. I want to spend mine in District Twelve. Wouldnt surprise me if you do, says Peeta. Give my mother my best when you make it back, will you?

Count on it, I say. Then I turn and leave the roof. I spend the rest of the night slipping in and out of a doze, imagining the cutting remarks I will make to Peeta Mellark in the morning. Peeta Mellark. We will see how high and mighty he is when he's faced with life and death. He'll probably turn into one of those raging beast tributes, the kind who tries to eat someone's heart after they've killed them. There was a guy like that a few years ago from District 6 called Titus. He went completely savage and the Gamemakers had to have him stunned with electric guns to collect the bodies of the players he'd killed before he ate them. There are no rules in the arena, but cannibalism doesn't play well with the Capitol audience, so they tried to head it off. There was some speculation that the avalanche that finally took Titus out was specifically engineered to ensure the victor was not a lunatic. I don't see Peeta in the morning. Cinna comes to me before dawn, gives me a simple shift to wear, and guides me to the roof. My final dressing and preparations will be alone in the catacombs under the arena itself. A hovercraft appears out of thin air, just like the one did in the woods the day I saw the redheaded Avox girl captured, and a ladder drops down. I place my hands and feet on the lower


rungs and instantly it's as if I'm frozen. Some sort of current glues me to the ladder while I'm lifted safely inside. I expect the ladder to release me then, but I'm still stuck when a woman in a white coat approaches me carrying a syringe. "This is just your tracker, Katniss. The stiller you are, the more efficiently I can place it, " she says. Still? I'm a statue. But that doesn't prevent me from feeling the sharp stab of pain as the needle inserts the metal tracking device deep under the skin on the inside of my forearm. Now the Gamemakers will always be able to trace my whereabouts in the arena. Wouldnt want to lose a tribute. As soon as the trackers in place, the ladder releases me. The woman disappears and Cinna is retrieved from the roof, An Avox boy comes in and directs us to a room where breakfast has been laid out. Despite the tension in my stomach, I eat as much as I can, although none of the delectable food makes any impression on me. Im so nervous, I could be eating coal dust. The one thing that distracts me at all is the view from the windows as we sail over the city and then to the wilderness beyond. This is what birds see. Only theyre free and safe. The very opposite of me. The ride lasts about half an hour before the windows black out, suggesting that were nearing the arena. The hovercraft lands and Cinna and I go back

to the ladder, only this time it leads down into a tube underground, into the catacombs that lie beneath the arena. We follow instructions to my destination, a chamber for my preparation. In the Capitol, they call it the Launch Room. In the districts, its referred to as the Stockyard. The place animals go before slaughter. Everything is brand-new, I will be the first and only tribute to use this Launch Room. The arenas are historic sites, preserved after the Games. Popular destinations for Capitol residents to visit, to vacation. Go for a month, rewatch the Games, tour the catacombs, visit the sites where the deaths took place. You can even take part in reenactments. They say the food is excellent. I struggle to keep my breakfast down as I shower and clean my teeth. Cinna does my hair in my simple trademark braid down my back. Then the clothes arrive, the same for every tribute. Cinna has had no say in my outfit, does not even know what will be in the package, but he helps me dress in the undergarments, simple tawny pants, light green blouse, sturdy brown belt, and thin, hooded black jacket that falls to my thighs. The material in the jackets designed to reflect body heat. Expect some cool nights, he says. The boots, worn over skintight socks, are better than I could have hoped for. Soft leather not unlike my ones at

home. These have a narrow flexible rubber sole with treads though. Good for running. I think Im finished when Cinna pulls the gold mockingjay pin from his pocket. I had completely forgotten about it. Where did you get that? I ask. Off the green outfit you wore on the train, he says. I remember now

taking it off my mothers dress, pinning it to the shirt. Its your district token, right? I nod and he fastens it on my shirt. It barely cleared the review board. Some thought the pin could be used as a weapon, giving you an unfair advantage. But eventually, they let it through, says Cinna. They eliminated a ring from that District One girl, though. If you twisted the gemstone, a spike popped out. Poisoned one. She claimed she had no knowledge the ring transformed and there was no way to prove she did. But she lost her token. There, youre all set. Move around. Make sure everything feels comfortable. I walk, run in a circle, swing my arms about. Yes, its fine. Fits perfectly. Then theres nothing to do but wait for the call, says Cinna. Unless you think you could eat any more? I turn down food but accept a glass of water that I take tiny sips of as we wait on a couch. I dont want to chew on my nails or lips, so I

find myself gnawing on the inside of my cheek. It still hasnt fully healed from a few days ago. Soon the taste of blood fills my mouth. Nervousness seeps into terror as I anticipate what is to come. I could be dead, flat-out dead, in an hour. Not even. My fingers obsessively trace the hard little lump on my forearm where the woman injected the tracking device. I press on it, even though it hurts, I press on it so hard a small bruise begins to form. Do you want to talk, Katniss? Cinna asks. I shake my head but after a moment hold out my hand to him. Cinna encloses it in both of his. And this is how we sit until a pleasant female voice announces its time to prepare for launch. Still clenching one of Cinnas hands, I walk over and stand on the circular metal plate. Remember what Haymitch said. Run, find water. The rest will follow, he says. I nod. And remember this. Im not allowed to bet, but if I could, my money would be on you. Truly? I whisper. Truly, says Cinna. He leans down and kisses me on the forehead. Good luck, girl on fire. And then a glass cylinder is lowering around me, breaking our handhold, cutting him off from me. He taps his fingers under his chin. Head high. I lift my chin and stand as straight as I can. The cylinder begins to rise. For maybe fifteen seconds, Im in darkness and then I can feel the metal plate pushing

me out of the cylinder, into the open air. For a moment, my eyes are dazzled by the bright sunlight and Im conscious only of a strong wind with the hopeful smell of pine trees. Then I hear the legendary announcer, Claudius Templesmith, as his voice booms all around me. Ladies and gentlemen, let the Seventy-fourth Hunger Games begin!

11.

Sixty seconds. Thats how long were required to stand on our metal circles before the sound of a gong releases us. Step off before the minute is up, and land mines blow your legs off. Sixty seconds to take in the ring of tributes all equidistant from the Cornucopia, a giant golden horn shaped like a cone with a curved tail, the mouth of which is at least twenty feet high, spilling over with

the things that will give us life here in the arena. Food, containers of water, weapons, medicine, garments, fire starters. Strewn around the Cornucopia are other supplies, their value decreasing the farther they are from the horn. For instance, only a few steps from my feet lays a three-foot square of plastic. Certainly it could be of some use in a downpour. But there in the mouth, I can see a tent pack that would protect from almost any sort of weather. If I had the guts to go in and fight for it against the other twenty-three tributes. Which I have been instructed not to do. Were on a flat, open stretch of ground. A plain of hard-packed dirt. Behind the tributes across from me, I can see nothing, indicating either a steep downward slope or even cliff. To my right lies a lake. To my left and back, spars piney woods. This is where Haymitch would want me to go. Immediately. I hear his instructions in my head. Just clear out, put as much distance as you can between yourselves and the others, and find a source of water. But its tempting, so tempting, when I see the bounty waiting there before me. And I know that if I dont get it, someone else will. That the Career Tributes who survive the bloodbath will divide up most of these life-sustaining spoils. Something catches my eye. There, resting on a mound of blanket rolls, is a silver sheath of arrows and a bow, already strung, just waiting to be engaged. Thats mine, I think. Its meant for me. Im fast. I can sprint faster than any of

the girls in our school although a couple can beat me in distance races. But this forty-yard length, this is what I am built for. I know I can get it, I know I can reach it first, but then the question is how quickly can I get out of there? By the time Ive scrambled up the packs and grabbed the weapons, others will have reached the horn, and one or two I might be able to pick off, but say theres a dozen, at that close range, they could take me down with the spears and the clubs. Or their own powerful fists. Still, I wont be the only target. Im betting many of the other tributes would pass up a smaller girl, even one who scored an eleven in training, to take out their more fierce adversaries. Haymitch has never seen me run. Maybe if he had hed tell me to go for it. Get the weapon. Since thats the very weapon that might be my salvation. And I only see one bow in that whole pile. I know the minute must be almost up and will have to decide what my strategy will be and I find myself positioning my feet to run, not away into the stir rounding forests but toward the pile, toward the bow. When suddenly I notice Peeta, hes about five tributes to my right, quite a fair distance, still I can tell hes looking at me and I think he might be shaking his head. But the suns in my eyes, and while Im puzzling over it the gong rings out. And Ive missed it! Ive missed my chance! Because those extra couple of seconds Ive lost by not being ready are enough to change my mind about going in. My

feet shuffle for a moment, confused at the direction my brain wants to take and then I lunge forward, scoop up the sheet of plastic and a loaf of bread. The pickings are so small and Im so angry with Peeta for distracting me that I sprint in twenty yards to retrieve a bright orange backpack that could hold anything because I cant stand leaving with virtually nothing. A boy, I think from District 9, reaches the pack at the same time I do and for a brief time we grapple for it and then he coughs, splattering my face with blood. I stagger back, repulsed by the warm, sticky spray. Then the boy slips to the ground. Thats when I see the knife in his back. Already other tributes have reached the Cornucopia and are spreading out to attack. Yes, the girl from District 2, ten yards away, running toward me, one hand clutching a half-dozen knives. Ive seen her throw in training. She never misses. And Im her next target. All the general fear Ive been feeling condenses into at immediate fear of this girl, this predator who might kill me in seconds. Adrenaline shoots through me and I sling the

pack over one shoulder and run full-speed for the woods. I can hear the blade whistling toward me and reflexively hike the pack up to protect my head. The blade lodges in the pack. Both straps on my shoulders now, I make for the trees. Somehow I know the girl will not pursue me. That shell be drawn back into the Cornucopia before all the good stuff is gone. A grin crosses my face. Thanks for the knife, I think. At the edge of the woods I turn for one instant to survey the field. About a dozen or so tributes are hacking away at one another at the horn. Several lie dead already on the ground. Those who have taken flight are disappearing into the trees or into the void opposite me. I continue running until the woods have hidden me from the other tributes then slow into a steady jog that I think I can maintain for a while. For the next few hours, I alternate between jogging and walking, putting as much distance as I can between myself and my competitors. I lost my bread during the struggle with the boy from District 9 but managed to stuff my plastic in my sleeve so as I walk I fold it neatly and tuck it into a pocket. I also free the knife its a fine one with a long sharp blade, serrated near the handle, which will make it handy for sawing through things and slide it into my belt. I dont dare stop to examine the contents of the pack yet. I just keep moving, pausing only to check for pursuers. I can go a long time. I know that from my days in the woods. But I will need water. That was Haymitchs second instruction, and since I sort of botched the first, I keep a sharp eye out for any sign of it. No luck. The woods begin to evolve, and the pines are intermixed with a variety of trees, some I recognize, some completely foreign to me. At one point, I hear a noise and pull my knife, thinking I may have to defend myself, but Ive only startled a rabbit. Good to see you, I whisper. If

theres one rabbit, there could be hundreds just waiting to be snared. The ground slopes down. I dont particularly like this. Valleys make me feel trapped. I want to be high, like in the hills around District 12, where I can see my enemies approaching. But I have no choice but to keep going. Funny though, I dont feel too bad. The days of gorging myself have paid off. Ive got staying power even though Im short on sleep. Being in the woods is rejuvenating. Im glad for the solitude, even though its an illusion, because Im probably on-screen right now. Not consistently but off and on. There are so many deaths to show the first day that a tribute trekking

through the woods isnt much to look at. But theyll show me enough to let people know Im alive, uninjured and on the move. One of the heaviest days of betting is the opening, when the initial casualties come in. But that cant compare to what happens as the field shrinks to a handful of players. Its late afternoon when I begin to hear the cannons. Each shot represents a dead tribute. The fighting must have finally stopped at the Cornucopia. They never collect the bloodbath bodies until the killers have dispersed. On the opening day, they dont even fire the cannons until the initial fightings over because its too hard to keep track of the fatalities. I allow myself to pause, panting, as I count the shots. One . . . Two . . . Three . . . On and on until they reach eleven. Eleven dead in all. Thirteen left to play. My fingernails scrape at the dried blood the boy from District 9 coughed into my face. Hes gone, certainly. I wonder about Peeta. Has he lasted through the day? Ill know in a few hours. When they project the deads images into the sky for the rest of us to see. All of a sudden, Im overwhelmed by the thought that Peeta may be already lost, bled white, collected, and in the process of being transported back to the Capitol to be cleaned up, redressed, and shipped in a simple wooden box back to District 12. No longer here.Heading home. I try hard to remember if I saw him once the action started. But the last image I can conjure up is Peeta shaking his head as the gong rang out. Maybe its better, if hes gone already. He had no confidence he could win. And I will not end up with the unpleasant task of killing him. Maybe its better if hes out of this for good. I slump down next to my pack, exhausted. I need to go through it anyway before night falls. See what I have to work with. As I unhook the straps, I can feel its sturdily made although a rather unfortunate color. This orange will practically glow in the dark. I make a mental note to camouflage it first thing tomorrow. I flip open the flap. What I want most, right at this moment, is water. Haymitchs directive to immediately find water was not arbitrary. I wont last long without it. For a few days, Ill be able to function with unpleasant symptoms of dehydration, but after that I'll deteriorate into helplessness and be dead in a week, tops. I

carefully lay out the provisions. One thin black sleeping bag that reflects body heal. A pack of crackers. A pack of dried beef strips. A bottle of iodine. A box of wooden matches. A small coil of wire. A pair of sunglasses. And a half-gallon plastic

bottle with a cap for carrying water that's bone dry. No water. How hard would it have been for them to fill up the bottle? I become aware of the dryness in my throat and mouth, the cracks in my lips. I've been moving all day long. It's been hot and I've sweat a lot. I do this at home, but there are always streams to drink from, or snow to melt if it should come to it. As I refill my pack I have an awful thought. The lake. The one I saw while I was waiting for the gong to sound. What if that's the only water source in the arena? That way they'll guarantee drawing us in to fight. The lake is a full day's journey from where I sit now, a much harder journey with nothing to drink. And then, even if I reach it, it's sure to be heavily guarded by some of the Career Tributes. I'm about to panic when I remember the rabbit I startled earlier today. It has to drink, too. I just have to find out where. Twilight is closing in and I am ill at ease. The trees are too thin to offer much concealment. The layer of pine needles that muffles my footsteps also makes tracking animals harder when I need their trails to find water. And I'm still heading downhill, deeper and deeper into a valley that seems endless. Im hungry, too, but I dont dare break into my precious store of crackers and beef yet. Instead, I take my knife and go to work on a pine tree, cutting away the outer bark and scraping off a large handful of the softer inner bark. I slowly chew the stuff as I walk along. After a week of the finest food in the world, its a little hard to choke down. But Ive eaten plenty of pine in my life. Ill adjust quickly. In another hour, its clear Ive got to find a place to camp. Night creatures are coming out. I can hear the occasional hoot or howl, my first clue that Ill be competing with natural predators for the rabbits. As to whether Ill be viewed as a source of food, its too soon to tell. There could be any number of animals stalking me at this moment. But right now, I decide to make my fellow tributes a priority. Im sure many will continue hunting through the night. Those who fought it out at the Cornucopia will have food, an abundance of water from the lake, torches or flashlights, and weapons theyre itching to use. I can only hope Ive traveled far and fast enough to be out of range. Before settling down, I take my wire and set two twitch-up snares in the brush. I know its risky to be setting traps, but food will go so fast out here. And I cant set snares on the run. Still, I walk another five minutes before making camp. I pick my tree carefully. A willow, not terribly tall but set in a clump of other willows, offering concealment in those long, flowing tresses. I climb up, sticking to the stronger

branches close to

the trunk, and find a sturdy fork for my bed. It takes some doing, but I arrange the sleeping bag in a relatively comfortable manner. I place my backpack in the foot of the bag, then slide in after it. As a precaution, I remove my belt, loop it all the way around the branch and my sleeping bag, and refasten it at my waist. Now if I roll over in my sleep, I wont go crashing to the ground. Im small enough to tuck the top of the bag over my head, but I put on my hood as well. As night falls, the air is cooling quickly. Despite the risk I took in getting the backpack, I know now it was the right choice. This sleeping bag, radiating back and preserving my body heat, will be invaluable. Im sure there are several other tributes whose biggest concern right now is how to stay warm whereas I may actually be able to get a few hours of sleep. If only I wasnt so thirsty . . . Night has just come when I hear the anthem that proceeds the death recap. Through the branches I can see the seal of the Capitol, which appears to be floating in the sky. Im actually viewing another screen, an enormous one thats transported by of one of their disappearing hovercraft. The anthem fades out and the sky goes dark for a moment. At home, we would be watching full coverage of each and every killing, but thats thought to give an unfair advantage to the living tributes. For instance, if I got my hands on the bow and shot someone, my secret would be revealed to all. No, here in the arena, all we see are the same photographs they showed when they televised our training scores. Simple head shots. But now instead of scores they post only district numbers. I take a deep breath as the face of the eleven dead tributes begin and tick them off one by one on my fingers. The first to appear is the girl from District 3. That means that the Career Tributes from 1 and 2 have all survived. No surprise there. Then the boy from 4. I didnt expect that one, usually all the Careers make it through the first day. The boy from District 5 . . . I guess the fox-faced girl made it. Both tributes from 6 and 7. The boy from 8. Both from 9. Yes, theres the boy who I fought for the backpack. Ive run through my fingers, only one more dead tribute to go. Is it Peeta? No, theres the girl from District 10. Thats it. The Capitol seal is back with a final musical flourish. Then darkness and the sounds of the forest resume. Im relieved Peetas alive. I tell myself again that if I get killed, his winning will benefit my mother and Prim the most. This is what I tell

myself to explain the conflicting emotions that arise when I think of Peeta. The gratitude that he gave me an edge by professing his love for me in the interview. The anger at his superiority on the roof. The dread that we may come face-to-face at any moment in this arena. Eleven dead, but none from District 12. I try to work out who is left. Five Career Tributes. Foxface. Thresh and Rue. Rue . . . So she made it through the first day after all. I cant

help feeling glad. That makes ten of us. The other three Ill figure out tomorrow. Now when it is dark, and I have traveled far, and I am nestled high in this tree, now I must try and rest. I havent really slept in two days, and then theres been the long days journey into the arena. Slowly, I allow my muscles to relax. My eyes to close. The last thing I think is its lucky I dont snore. . . . Snap! The sound of a breaking branch wakes me. How long have I been asleep? Four hours? Five? The tip of my nose is icy cold. Snap! Snap! Whats going on? This is not the sound of a branch under someones foot, but the sharp crack of one coming from a tree. Snap! Snap! I judge it to be several hundred yards to my right. Slowly, noiselessly, I turn myself in that direction. For a few minutes, theres nothing but blackness and some scuffling. Then I see a spark and a small fire begins to bloom. A pair of hands warms over flames, but I cant make out more than that. I have to bite my lip not to scream every foul name I know at the fire starter. What are they thinking? A fire Ill just at nightfall would have been one thing. Those who battled at the Cornucopia, with their superior strength and surplus of supplies, they couldnt possibly have been near enough to spot the flames then. But now, when theyve probably been combing the woods for hours looking for victims. You might as well be waving a flag and shouting, Come and get me! And here I am a stones throw from the biggest idiot in the Games. Strapped in a tree. Not daring to flee since my general location has just been broadcast to any killer who cares. I mean, I know its cold out here and not everybody has a sleeping bag. But then you grit your teeth and stick it out until dawn! I lay smoldering in my bag for the next couple of hours really thinking that if I can get out of this tree, I wont have the least problem taking out my new neighbor. My instinct has been to flee, not fight. But obviously this persons a hazard. Stupid people are dangerous. And this one probably doesnt have much in the way of weapons while Ive got this excellent knife.

The sky is still dark, but I can feel the first signs of dawn approaching. Im beginning to think we meaning the person whose death Im now devising and me we might actually have gone unnoticed. Then I hear it. Several pairs of feet breaking into a run. The fire starter must have dozed off. Theyre on her before she can escape. I know its a girl now, I can tell by the pleading, the agonized scream that follows. Then theres laughter and congratulations from several voices. Someone cries out, Twelve down and eleven to go! which gets a round of appreciative hoots. So theyre fighting in a pack. Im not really surprised. Often alliances are formed in the early stages of the Games. The strong band together to hunt down the weak then, when the tension becomes too great, begin to turn on one another. I dont have to wonder too hard who has made this alliance. Itll be the remaining Career

Tributes from Districts 1, 2, and 4. Two boys and three girls. The ones who lunched together. For a moment, I hear them checking the girl for supplies. I can tell by their comments theyve found nothing good. I wonder if the victim is Rue but quickly dismiss the thought. Shes much too bright to be building a fire like that. Better clear out so they can get the body before it starts stinking. Im almost certain thats the brutish boy from District 2. There are murmurs of assent and then, to my horror, I hear the pack heading toward me. They do not know Im here. How could they? And Im well concealed in the clump of trees. At least while the sun stays down. Then my black sleeping bag will turn from camouflage to trouble. If they just keep moving, they will pass me and be gone in a minute. But the Careers stop in the clearing about ten yards from my tree. They have flashlights, torches. I can see an arm here, a boot there, through the breaks in the branches. I turn to stone, not even daring to breathe. Have they spotted me? No, not yet. I can tell from their words their minds are elsewhere. Shouldnt we have heard a cannon by now? Id say yes. Nothing to prevent them from going in immediately. Unless she isnt dead. Shes dead. I stuck her myself. Then wheres the cannon? Someone should go back. Make sure the jobs done. Yeah, we dont want to have to track her down twice. I said shes dead! An argument breaks out until one tribute silences the others. Were wasting time! Ill go finish her and lets move on! I almost fall out of the tree. The voice belongs to Peeta.

12.

Thank goodness, I had the foresight to belt myself in. Ive rolled sideways off the fork and Im facing the ground, held in place by the belt, one hand, and my feet straddling the pack inside my sleeping bag, braced against the trunk. There must have been some rustling when I tipped sideways, but the Careers have been too caught up in their own argument to catch it. Go on, then, Lover Boy, says the boy from District 2. See for yourself. I just get a glimpse of Peeta, lit by a torch, heading back to the girl by the fire. His face is swollen with bruises, theres a bloody bandage on one arm, and from the sound of his gait hes limping somewhat. I remember him shaking him his head, telling me not to go into the fight for the supplies, when all along, all along hed planned to throw himself into the thick of things. Just the opposite of what Haymitch had mid him to do. Okay, I can stomach that. Seeing all those supplies was tempting. But this . . . This other thing. This teaming up with the Career wolf pack to hunt down the rest of us. No one from District 12 would think of doing such a thing! Career tributes are overly vicious, arrogant, better fed, but only because theyre the Capitols lapdogs. Universally, solidly hated by all but those from their own districts. I can imagine the things theyre saying about him back home now. And Peeta had the gall to talk to me about disgrace? Obviously, the noble boy on the rooftop

was playing just one more game with me. But this will be his last. I will eagerly watch the night skies for signs of his death, if I dont kill him first myself. The Career tributes are silent until he gets out of ear shot, then use hushed voices. Why dont we just kill him now and get it over with? Let him tag along. Whats the harm? And hes handy with that knife. Is he? Thats news. What a lot of interesting things Im learning about my friend Peeta today. Besides, hes our best chance of finding her. It takes me a moment to register that the her theyre referring to is me. Why? You think she bought into that sappy romance stuff? She might have. Seemed pretty simpleminded to me. Every time I think about her spinning around in that dress, I want to puke. Wish we knew how she got that eleven. Bet you Lover Boy knows. The sound of Peeta returning silences them. Was she dead? asks the boy from District 2. No. But she is

now, says Peeta. Just then, the cannon fires. Ready to move on? The Career pack sets off at a run just as dawn begins to break, and birdsong fills the air. I remain in my awkward position, muscles trembling with exertion for a while longer, then hoist myself back onto my branch. I need to get down, to get going, but for a moment I lie there, digesting what Ive heard. Not only is Peeta with the Careers, hes helping them find me. The simpleminded girl who has to be taken seriously because of her eleven. Because she can use a bow and arrow. Which Peeta knows better than anyone. But he hasnt told them yet. Is he saving that information because he knows its all that keeps him alive? Is he still pretending to love me for the audience? What is going on in his head? Suddenly, the birds fall silent. Then one gives a high-pitched warning call. A single note. Just like the one Gale and I heard when the redheaded Avox girl was caught. High above the dying campfire a hovercraft materializes. A set of huge metal teeth drops down. Slowly, gently, the dead tribute girl is lifted into the hovercraft. Then it vanishes. The birds resume their song. Move, I whisper to myself. I wriggle out of my sleeping bag, roll it up, and place it in the pack. I take a deep breath. While Ive been concealed by darkness and the sleeping bag and the willow

branches, it has probably been difficult for the cameras to get a good shot of me. I know they must be tracking me now though. The minute I hit the ground, Im guaranteed a close-up. The audience will have been beside themselves, knowing I was in the tree, that I overheard the Careers talking, that I discovered Peeta was with them. Until I work out exactly how I want to play that, Id better at least act on top of things. Not perplexed. Certainly not confused or frightened. No, I need to look one step ahead of the game. So as I slide out of the foliage and into the dawn light, I pause a second, giving the cameras time to lock on me. Then I cock my head slightly to the side and give a knowing smile. There! Let them figure out

what that means! Im about to take off when I think of my snares. Maybe its imprudent to check them with the others so close. But have to. Too many years of hunting, I guess. And the lure of possible meat. Im rewarded with one fine rabbit. In no time, Ive cleaned and gutted the animal, leaving the head, feet, tail, skin, and innards, under a pile of leaves. Im wishing for a fire eating raw rabbit can give you rabbit fever, a lesson I learned the hard way when I think of the dead tribute. I hurry

back to her camp. Sure enough, the coals of her dying fire are still hot. I cut up the rabbit, fashion a spit out of branches, and set it over the coals. Im glad for the cameras now. I want sponsors to see I can hunt, that Im a good bet because I wont be lured into traps as easily as the others will by hunger. While the rabbit cooks, I grind up part of a charred branch and set about camouflaging my orange pack. The black tones it down, but I feel a layer of mud would definitely help. Of course, to have mud, Id need water . . . I pull on my gear, grab my spit, kick some dirt over the coals, and take off in the opposite direction the Careers went. I eat half the rabbit as I go, then wrap up the leftovers in my plastic for later. The meat stops the grumbling in my stomach but does little to quench my thirst. Water is my top priority now. As I hike along, I feel certain Im still holding the screen in the Capitol, so Im careful to continue to hide my emotions. But what a good time Claudius Templesmith must be having with his guest commentators, dissecting Peetas behavior, my reaction. What to make of it all? Has Peeta revealed his true colors? How does this affect the betting odds? Will we lose sponsors? Do we even have sponsors? Yes, I feel certain we do, or at least did. Certainly Peeta has thrown a wrench into our star-crossed lover

dynamic. Or has he? Maybe, since he hasnt spoken much about me, we can still get some mileage out of it. Maybe people will think its something we plotted together if I seem like it amuses me now. The sun rises in the sky and even through the canopy it seems overly bright. I coat my lips in some grease from the rabbit and try to keep from panting, but its no use. Its only been a day and Im dehydrating fast. I try and think of everything I know about finding water. It runs downhill, so, in fact, continuing down into this valley isnt a bad thing. If I could just locate a game trail or spot a particularly green patch of vegetation, these might help me along, but nothing seems to change. Theres just the slight gradual slope, the birds, the sameness to the trees. As the day wears on, I know Im headed for trouble. What little urine Ive been able to pass is a dark brown, my head is aching, and theres a dry patch on my tongue that refuses to moisten. The sun hurts my eyes so I dig out my sunglasses, but when I put them on they do something funny to my vision, so I just stuff them back in my pack. Its late afternoon when I think Ive found

help. I spot a cluster of berry bushes and hurry to strip the fruit, to suck the

sweet juices from the skins. But just as Im holding them to my lips, I get a hard look at them. What I thought were blueberries have a slightly different shape, and when I break one open the insides are bloodred. I dont recognize these berries, perhaps they are edible, but Im guessing this is some evil trick on the part of the Gamemakers. Even the plant instructor in the Training Center made a point of telling us to avoid berries unless you were 100 percent sure they werent toxic. Something I already knew, but Im so thirsty it takes her reminder to give me the strength to fling them away. Fatigue is beginning to settle on me, but its not the usual tiredness that follows a long hike. I have to stop and rest frequently, although I know the only cure for what ails me requires continued searching. I try a new tactic climbing a tree as high as I dare in my shaky state to look for any signs of water. But as far as I can see in any direction, theres the same unrelenting stretch of forest. Determined to go on until nightfall, I walk until Im stumbling over my own feet. Exhausted, I haul myself up into a tree and belt myself in. Ive no appetite, but I suck on a rabbit bone just to give my mouth something to do. Night falls, the anthem plays, and high in the sky I see the picture of the girl, who was apparently from District 8. The one Peeta went

back to finish off. My fear of the Career pack is minor compared to my burning thirst. Besides, they were heading away from me and by now they, too, will have to rest. With the scarcity of water, they may even have had to return to the lake for refills. Maybe, that is the only course for me as well. Morning brings distress. My heads throbs with every beat of my heart. Simple movements send stabs of pain through my joints. I fall, rather than jump from the tree. It takes several minutes for me to assemble my gear. Somewhere inside me, I know this is wrong. I should be acting with more caution, moving with more urgency. But my mind seems foggy and forming a plan is hard. I lean back against the trunk of my tree, one finger gingerly stroking the sandpaper surface of my tongue, as I assess my options. How can I get water? Return to the lake. No good. Id never make it. Hope for rain. Theres not a cloud in the sky. Keep looking. Yes, this is my only chance. But then, another thought hits me, and the surge of anger that follows brings me to me senses. Haymitch! He could send me water! Press a button and have it delivered to me in a silver parachute in minutes. I know I must have sponsors, at least one or two who could afford a pint of liquid for me. Yes, its pricey, but these people, theyre made of money. And theyll

be betting on me as well. Perhaps Haymitch doesnt realize how deep my need is. I say in a voice as loud as I dare. Water. I wait, hopefully, for a parachute to descend from the sky. But nothing is forthcoming. Something is wrong.

Am I deluded about having sponsors? Or has Peetas behavior made them all hang back? No, I dont believe it. Theres someone out there who wants to buy me water only Haymitch is refusing to let it go through. As my mentor, he gets to control the flow of gifts from the sponsors. I know he hates me. Hes made that clear enough. But enough to let me die? From this? He cant do that, can he? If a mentor mistreats his tributes, hell be held accountable by the viewers, by the people back in District 12. Even Haymitch wouldnt risk that, would he? Say what you will about my fellow traders in the Hob, but I dont think theyd welcome him back there if he let me die this way. And then where would he get his liquor? So . . . What? Is he trying to make me suffer for defying him? Is he directing all the sponsors toward Peeta? Is he just too drunk to even notice whats going on at the moment? Somehow I dont believe that and I dont believe hes trying to kill me off by neglect, either. He has, in fact, in his own unpleasant way, genuinely been trying to prepare me for this. Then what is going on? I bury my face in my hands. Theres no danger of tears now, I couldnt produce one to save my life. What is Haymitch doing? Despite my anger, hatred, and suspicions, a small voice in the back of my head whispers an answer. Maybe hes sending you a message, it says. A message. Saying what? Then I know. Theres only one good reason Haymitch could be withholding water from me. Because he knows Ive almost found it. I grit my teeth and pull myself to my feet. My backpack seems to have tripled in weight. I find a broken branch that will do for a walking stick and I start off. The suns beating down, even more searing than the first two days. I feel like an old piece of leather, drying and cracking in the heat. Every step is an effort, but I refuse to stop. I refuse to sit down. If I sit, theres a good chance I wont be able to get up again, that I wont even remember my task. What easy prey I am! Any tribute, even tiny Rue, could take me right now, merely shove me over and kill me with my own knife, and Id have little strength to resist. But if anyone is in my part of the woods, they ignore me. The truth is, I feel a million miles from another living soul. Not alone though. No, theyve surely got a camera tracking me now. I think back to

the years of watching tributes starve, freeze, bleed, and dehydrate to death. Unless theres a really good fight going on somewhere, Im being featured. My thoughts turn to Prim. Its likely she wont be watching me live, but theyll show updates at the school during lunch. For her sake, I try to look as least desperate as I can. But by afternoon, I know the end is coming. My legs are shaking and my heart too quick. I keep forgetting, exactly what Im doing. Ive stumbled repeatedly and managed to regain my feet, but when the stick slides out from under me, I finally tumble to the ground unable to get up. I let my eyes close. I have misjudged Haymitch. He has no

intention of helping me at all. This is all right, I think. This is not so bad here. The air is less hot, signifying evenings approach. Theres a slight, sweet scent that reminds me of lilies. My fingers stroke the smooth ground, sliding easily across the top. This is an okay place to die, I think. My fingertips make small swirling patterns in the cool, slippery earth. I love mud, I think. How many times Ive tracked game with the help of its soft, readable surface. Good for bee stings, too. Mud. Mud. Mud! My eyes fly open and I dig my fingers into the earth. It is mud! My nose lifts in the air. And those are lilies! Pond lilies! I crawl now, through the mud, dragging myself toward the scent. Five yards from where I fell, I crawl through a tangle of plants into a pond. Floating on the top, yellow flowers in bloom, are my beautiful lilies. Its all I can do not to plunge my face into the water and gulp down as much as I can hold. But I have just enough sense left to abstain. With trembling hands, I get out my flask and fill it with water. I add what I remember to be the right number of drops of iodine for purifying it. The half an hour of waiting is agony, but I do it. At least, I think its a half an hour, but its certainly as long as I can stand. Slowly, easy now, I tell myself. I take one swallow and make myself wait. Then another. Over the next couple of hours, I drink the entire half gallon. Then a second. I prepare another before I retire to a tree where I continue sipping, eating rabbit, and even indulge in one of my precious crackers. By the time the anthem plays, I feel remarkably better. There are no faces tonight, no tributes died today. Tomorrow Ill stay here, resting, camouflaging my backpack with mud, catching some of those little fish I saw as I sipped, digging up the roots of the pond lilies to make a nice meal. I snuggle down in my sleeping bag, hanging on to my water bottle for dear life, which, of course, it is. A few hours later,

the stampede of feet shakes me from slumber. I look around in bewilderment. Its not yet dawn, but my stinging eyes can see it. It would be hard to miss the wall of fire descending on me.

13.

My first impulse is to scramble from the tree, but Im belted in. Somehow my fumbling fingers release the buckle and I fall to the ground in a heap, still snarled in my sleeping bag. Theres no time for any kind of packing. Fortunately, my backpack and water bottle are already in the bag. I shove in the belt, hoist the bag over my shoulder, and flee. The world has transformed to flame and smoke. Burning branches crack from trees and fall in showers of sparks at my feet. All I can do is follow the others, the rabbits and deer and I even spot a wild dog pack shooting through the woods. I trust their sense of direction because their instincts are sharper than mine. But they are much faster, flying through the underbrush so gracefully as my boots catch on roots and fallen tree limbs, that theres no way I can keep apace with them. The heat is horrible, but worse than the heat is the smoke, which threatens to suffocate me at any moment. I pull the top of my shirt up over my nose, grateful to find it soaked in sweat, and it offers a thin veil of protection. And I run, choking, my bag banging against my back, my face cut with branches that materialize from the gray haze without warning, because I know I am supposed to run. This was no tributes campfire gone out of control, no accidental occurrence. The flames that bear down on me have an unnatural height, a uniformity that marks them as human-made, machine-made, Gamemaker-made. Things have been too quiet today. No deaths, perhaps no fights at all. The audience in the Capitol will be getting bored, claiming that these Games are verging on dullness. This is the one thing the Games must not do. Its not hard to follow the Gamemakers motivation. There is the Career pack and then there are the rest of us, probably spread far and thin across the arena. This fire is designed to flush us out, to drive us together. It may not be the most original device Ive seen, but its very, very effective. I hurdle over a burning log. Not high enough. The tail end of my jacket catches on fire and I have to stop to rip it from my body and stamp out the flames. But I dont dare leave the jacket, scorched and

smoldering as it is, I take the risk of shoving it in my sleeping bag, hoping the lack of air will quell what I havent extinguished. This is all I have, what I carry on my back, and its little enough to survive with. In a matter of minutes, my throat and nose are burning. The coughing begins soon after and my lungs begin to feel as if they are actually being cooked. Discomfort turns to distress until each breath sends a searing pain through my chest. I manage to take cover under a stone outcropping just as the vomiting begins, and I lose my meager supper and whatever water has remained in my stomach. Crouching on my hands and knees, I retch until theres nothing left to come up. I know I need to keep moving, but Im trembling and light-headed now, gasping for air. I allow myself about a spoonful of water to rinse my mouth and spit then take a few swallows from my bottle. You get one minute, I tell myself. One minute to rest. I take the time to reorder my supplies, wad up the sleeping bag, and messily stuff everything into the backpack. My minutes up. I know its time to move on, but the smoke has clouded my thoughts. The swift-footed animals that were my compass have left me behind. I know I havent been in this part of the woods before, there were no sizable rocks like the one Im sheltering against on my earlier travels.

Where are the Gamemakers driving me? Back to the lake? To a whole new terrain filled with new dangers? I had just found a few hours of peace at the pond when this attack began. Would there be any way I could travel parallel to the fire and work my way back there, to a source of water at least? The wall of fire must have an

end and it wont burn indefinitely. Not because the Gamemakers couldnt keep it fueled but because, again, that would invite accusations of boredom from the audience. If I could get back behind the fire line, I could avoid meeting up with the Careers. Ive just decided to try and loop back around, although it will require miles of travel away from the inferno and then a very circuitous route back, when the first fireball blasts into the rock about two feet from my head. I spring out from under my ledge, energized by renewed fear. The game has taken a twist. The fire was just to get us moving, now the audience will get to see some real fun. When I hear the next hiss, I flatten on the ground, not taking time to look. The fireball hits a tree off to my left, engulfing it in flames. To remain still is death. Im barely on my feet before the third ball hits the ground where I was lying, sending a pillar of fire up behind me. Time

loses meaning now as I frantically try to dodge the attacks. I cant see where theyre being launched from, but its not a hovercraft. The angles are not extreme enough. Probably this whole segment of the woods has been armed with precision launchers that are concealed in trees or rocks. Somewhere, in a cool and spotless room, a Gamemaker sits at a set of controls, fingers on the triggers that could end my life in a second. All that is needed is a direct hit. Whatever vague plan I had conceived regarding returning to my pond is wiped from my mind as I zigzag and dive and leap to avoid the fireballs. Each one is only the size of an apple, but packs tremendous power on contact. Every sense I have goes into overdrive as the need to survive takes over. Theres no time to judge if a move is the correct one. When theres a hiss, I act or die. Something keeps me moving forward, though. A lifetime of watching the Hunger Games lets me know that certain areas of the arena are rigged for certain attacks. And that if I can just get away from this section, I might be able to move out of reach of the launchers. I might also then fall straight into a pit of vipers, but I cant worry about that now. How long I scramble along dodging the fireballs I cant say, but the attacks finally begin to abate. Which is good, because Im retching

again. This time its an acidic substance that scalds my throat and makes its way into my nose as well. Im forced to stop as my body convulses, trying desperately to rid itself of the poisons Ive been sucking in during the attack. I wait for the next hiss, the next signal to bolt. It doesnt come. The force of the retching has squeezed tears out of my stinging eyes. My clothes are drenched in sweat. Somehow, through the smoke and vomit, I pick up the scent of singed hair. My hand fumbles to my braid and finds a fireball has seared off at least six inches of it. Strands of blackened hair crumble in my fingers. I stare at them, fascinated by the transformation, when the hissing registers. My muscles react, only not fast enough

this time. The fireball crashes into the ground at my side, but not before it skids across my right calf. Seeing my pants leg on fire sends me over the edge. I twist and scuttle backward on my hands and feet, shrieking, trying to remove myself from the horror. When I finally regain enough sense, I roll the leg back and forth on the ground, which stifles the worst of it. But then, without thinking, I rip away the remaining fabric with my bare hands. I sit on the ground, a few yards from the blaze

set off by the fireball. My calf is screaming, my hands covered in red welts. Im shaking too hard to move. If the Gamemakers want to finish me off, now is the time. I hear Cinnas voice, carrying images of rich fabric and sparkling gems. Katniss, the girl who was on fire. What a good laugh the Gamemakers must be having over that one. Perhaps, Cinnas beautiful costumes have even brought on this particular torture for me. I know he couldnt have foreseen this, must be hurting for me because, in fact, I believe he cares about me. But all in all, maybe showing up stark naked in that chariot would have been safer for me. The attack is now over. The Gamemakers dont want me dead. Not yet anyway. Everyone knows they could destroy us all within seconds of the opening gong. The real sport of the Hunger Games is watching the tributes kill one another. Every so often, they do kill a tribute just to remind the players they can. But mostly, they manipulate us into confronting one another face-to-face. Which means, if I am no longer being fired at, there is at least one other tribute close at hand. I would drag myself into a tree and take cover now if I could, but the smoke is still thick enough to kill me. I make myself stand and begin to limp away from the wall of flames that lights up the sky. It does not seem to be pursuing me any longer, except

with its stinking black clouds. Another light, daylight, begins to softly emerge. Swirls of smoke catch the sunbeams. My visibility is poor. I can see maybe fifteen yards in any direction. A tribute could easily be concealed from me here. I should draw my knife as a precaution, but I doubt my ability to hold it for long. The pain in my hands can in no way compete with that in my calf. I hate burns, have always hated them, even a small one gotten from pulling a pan of bread from the oven. It is the worst kind of pain to me, but I have never experienced anything like this. Im so weary I dont even notice Im in the pool until Im ankle-deep. Its spring-fed, bubbling up out of a crevice in some rocks, and blissfully cool. I plunge my hands into the shallow water and feel instant relief. Isnt that what my mother always says? The first treatment for a burn is cold water? That it draws out the heat? But she means minor burns. Probably shed recommend it for my hands. But what of my calf? Although I have not yet had the courage to examine it, Im guessing that its an injury in a whole different class. I lie on my stomach at edge of the

pool for a while, dangling my hands in the water, examining the little flames on

my fingernails that are beginning to chip off. Good. Ive had enough fire for a lifetime. I bathe the blood and ash from my face. I try to recall all I know about burns. They are common injuries in the Seam where we cook and heat our homes with coal. Then there are the mine accidents. . . . A family once brought in an unconscious young man pleading with my mother to help him. The district doctor whos responsible for treating the miners had written him off, told the family to take him home to die. But they wouldnt accept this. He lay on our kitchen table, senseless to the world. I got a glimpse of the wound on his thigh, gaping, charred flesh, burned clear down to the bone, before I ran from the house. I went to the woods and hunted the entire day, haunted by the gruesome leg, memories of my fathers death. Whats funny was, Prim, whos scared of her own shadow, stayed and helped. My mother says healers are born, not made. They did their best, but the man died, just like the doctor said he would. My leg is in need of attention, but I still cant look at it. What if its as bad as the mans and I can see my bone? Then I remember my mother saying that if a burns severe, the victim might not even feel pain because the nerves would be destroyed. Encouraged by this, I sit up and swing my leg in front of me. I almost faint

at the sight of my calf. The flesh is a brilliant red covered with blisters. I force myself to take deep, slow breaths, feeling quite certain the cameras are on my face. I cant show weakness at this injury. Not if I want help. Pity does not get you aid. Admiration at your refusal to give in does. I cut the remains of the pant leg off at the knee and examine the injury more closely. The burned area is about the size of my hand. None of the skin is blackened. I think its not too bad to soak. Gingerly I stretch out my leg into the pool, propping the heel of my boot on a rock so the leather doesnt get too sodden, and sigh, because this does offer some relief. I know there are herbs, if I could find them, that would speed the healing, but I cant quite call them to mind. Water and time will probably be all I have to work with. Should I be moving on? The smoke is slowly clearing but still too heavy to be healthy. If I do continue away from the fire, wont I be walking straight into the weapons of the Careers? Besides, every time I lift my leg from the water, the pain rebounds so intensely I have to slide it back in. My hands are slightly less demanding. They can handle small breaks from the pool. So I slowly put my gear back in order. First I fill my bottle with the pool water, treat it, and when enough time has passed, begin to rehydrate my body. After a time,

I force myself to nibble on a cracker, which helps settle my stomach. I roll up my sleeping bag. Except for a few black marks, its relatively unscathed. My jackets another matter. Stinking and scorched, at least

a foot of the back beyond repair. I cut off the damaged area leaving me with a garment that comes just to the bottom of my ribs. But the hoods intact and its far better than nothing. Despite the pain, drowsiness begins to take over. Id take to a tree and try to rest, except Id be too easy to spot. Besides, abandoning my pool seems impossible. I neatly arrange my supplies, even settle my pack on my shoulders, but I cant seem to leave. I spot some water plants with edible roots and make a small meal with my last piece of rabbit. Sip water. Watch the sun make its slow arc across the sky. Where would I go anyway that is any safer than here? I lean back on my pack, overcome by drowsiness. If the Careers want me, let them find me, I think before drifting into a stupor. Let them find me. And find me, they do. Its lucky Im ready to move on because when I hear the feet, I have less than a minute head start. Evening has begun to fall. The moment I awake, Im up and running, splashing across the pool,

flying into the underbrush. My leg slows me down, but I sense my pursuers are not as speedy as they were before the fire, either. I hear their coughs, their raspy voices calling to one another. Still, they are closing in, just like a pack of wild dogs, and so I do what I have done my whole life in such circumstances. I pick a high tree and begin to climb. If running hurt, climbing is agonizing because it requires not only exertion but direct contact of my hands on the tree bark. Im fast, though, and by the time theyve reached the base of my trunk, Im twenty feet up. For a moment, we stop and survey one another. I hope they cant hear the pounding of my heart. This could be it, I think. What chance do I have against them? All six are there, the five Careers and Peeta, and my only consolation is theyre pretty beat-up, too. Even so, look at their weapons. Look at their faces, grinning and snarling at me, a sure kill above them. It seems pretty hopeless. But then something else registers. Theyre bigger and stronger than I am, no doubt, but theyre also heavier. Theres a reason its me and not Gale who ventures up to pluck the highest fruit, or rob the most remote bird nests. I must weigh at least fifty or sixty pounds less than the smallest Career. Now I smile. Hows everything with you? I call down cheerfully. This takes them aback, but I know

the crowd will love it. Well enough, says the boy from District 2. Yourself? Its been a bit warm for my taste, I say. I can almost hear the laughter from the Capitol. The airs better up here. Why dont you come on up? Think I will, says the same boy. Here, take this, Cato, says the girl from District 1, and she offers him the silver bow and sheath of arrows. My bow! My arrows! Just the sight of them makes me so angry I want to scream, at myself, at that traitor Peeta for distracting me from having them. I try to make eye contact with him now, but he seems to be intentionally avoiding my gaze as he polishes his knife with the edge

of his shirt. No, says Cato, pushing away the bow. Ill do better with my sword. I can see the weapon, a short, heavy blade at his belt. I give Cato time to hoist himself into the tree before I begin to climb again. Gale always says I remind him of a squirrel the way I can scurry up even the slenderest limb. Part of its my weight, but part of its practice. You have to know where to place your hands and feet. Im another thirty feet in the air when I hear the crack and look down to see Cato flailing as he and a branch go down. He hits the ground hard and Im hoping he possibly broke his neck

when he gets back to his feet, swearing like a fiend. The girl with the arrows, Glimmer I hear someone call her ugh, the names the people in District 1 give their children are so ridiculous anyway Glimmer scales the tree until the branches begin to crack under her feet and then has the good sense to stop. Im at least eighty feet high now. She tries to shoot me and its immediately evident that shes incompetent with a bow. One of the arrows gets lodged in the tree near me though and Im able to seize it. I wave it teasingly above her head, as if this was the sole purpose of retrieving it, when actually I mean to use it if I ever get the chance. I could kill them, everyone of them, if those silver weapons were in my hands. The Careers regroup on the ground and I can hear them growling conspiratorially among themselves, furious I have made them look foolish. But twilight has arrived and their window of attack on me is closing. Finally, I hear Peeta say harshly, Oh, let her stay up there. Its not like shes going anywhere. Well deal with her in the morning. Well, hes right about one thing. Im going nowhere. All the relief from the pool water has gone, leaving me to feel the full potency of my burns. I scoot down to a fork in the tree and clumsily prepare for bed. Put on my jacket. Lay out my sleeping bed. Belt myself in and try to keep from

moaning. The heat of the bags too much for my leg. I cut a slash in the fabric and hang my calf out in the open air. I drizzle water on the wound, my hands. All my bravado is gone. Im weak from pain and hunger but cant bring myself to eat. Even if I can last the night, what will the morning bring? I stare into the foliage trying to will myself to rest, but the burns forbid it. Birds are settling down for the night, singing lullabies to their young. Night creatures emerge. An owl hoots. The faint scent of a skunk cuts through the smoke. The eyes of some animal peer at me from the neighboring tree a possum maybe catching the firelight from the Careers torches. Suddenly, Im up on one elbow. Those are no possums eyes, I know their glassy reflection too well. In fact, those are not animal eyes at all. In the last dim rays of light, I make her out, watching me silently from between the branches. Rue. How long has she been here? The whole time probably. Still and unobserved as the action unfolded beneath her. Perhaps she headed up her tree

shortly before I did, hearing the pack was so close. For a while we hold each others gaze. Then, without even rustling a leaf, her little hand slides into the open and

points to something above my head.

14.

My eyes follow the line of her finger up into the foliage above me. At first, I have no idea what shes pointing to, but then, about fifteen feet up, I make out the vague shape in the dimming light. But of . . . Of what? Some sort of animal? It looks about the size of a raccoon, but it hangs from the bottom of a branch, swaying ever so slightly. Theres something else. Among the familiar evening sounds of the woods, my ears register a low hum. Then I know. Its a wasp nest. Fear shoots through me, but I have enough sense to keep still. After all, I dont know what kind of wasp lives there. It could be the ordinary leave-us-alone-and-well-leave-you-alone type. But these are the Hunger Games, and ordinary isnt the norm. More likely they will be one of the Capitols muttations, tracker jackers. Like the jabberjays, these killer wasps were spawned in a lab and strategically placed, like land mines, around the districts during the war. Larger than regular wasps, they have a distinctive solid gold body and a

sting that raises a lump the size of a plum on contact. Most people cant tolerate more than a few stings. Some die at once. If you live, the hallucinations brought on by the venom have actually driven people to madness. And theres another thing, these wasps will hunt down anyone who disturbs their nest and attempt to kill them. Thats where the tracker part of the name comes from. After the war, the Capitol destroyed all the nests surrounding their city, but the ones near the districts were left untouched. Another reminder of our weakness, I suppose, just like the Hunger Games. Another reason to keep inside the fence of District 12. When Gale and I come across a tracker jacker nest, we immediately head in the opposite direction. So is that what hangs above me? I look back to Rue for help, but shes melted into her tree. Given my circumstances, I guess it doesnt matter what type of wasp nest it is. Im wounded and trapped. Darkness has given me a brief reprieve, but by the time the sun rises, the Careers will have formulated a plan to kill me. Theres no way they could do otherwise after Ive made them look so stupid. That nest may be the sole option I have left. If I can drop it down on them, I may be able to escape. But Ill risk my life in the process. Of course, Ill never be able to get in close enough to the actual nest to

cut it free. Ill have to saw off the branch at the trunk and send the whole thing down. The serrated portion of my knife should be able to manage that. But can my hands? And will the vibration from the sawing raise the swarm? And what if the Careers figure out what Im doing and move their camp? That would defeat the whole purpose. I realize that the best chance Ill have to do the sawing without drawing notice will be during the

anthem. That could begin any time. I drag myself out of my bag, make sure my knife is secured in my belt, and begin to make my way up the tree. This in itself is dangerous since the branches are becoming precariously thin even for me, but I persevere. When I reach the limb that supports the nest, the humming becomes more distinctive. But its still oddly subdued if these are tracker jackers. Its the smoke, I think. Its sedated them. This was the one defense the rebels found to battle the wasps. The seal of the Capitol shines above me and the anthem blares out. Its now or never, I think, and begin to saw. Blisters burst on my right hand as I awkwardly drag the knife back and forth. Once Ive got a groove, the work requires less effort but is almost

more than I can handle. I grit my teeth and saw away occasionally glancing at the sky to register that there were no deaths today. Thats all right. The audience will be sated seeing me injured and treed and the pack below me. But the anthems running out and Im only three quarters of the way through the wood when the music ends, the sky goes dark, and Im forced to stop. Now what? I could probably finish off the job by sense of feel but that may not be the smartest plan. If the wasps are too groggy, if the nest catches on its way down, if I try to escape, this could all be a deadly waste of time. Better, I think, to sneak up here at dawn and send the nest into my enemies. In the faint light of the Careers torches, I inch back down to my fork to find the best surprise Ive ever had. Sitting on my sleeping bag is a small plastic pot attached to a silver parachute. My first gift from a sponsor! Haymitch must have had it sent in during the anthem. The pot easily fits in the palm of my hand. What can it be? Not food surely. I unscrew the lid and I know by the scent that its medicine. Cautiously, I probe the surface of the ointment. The throbbing in my fingertip vanishes. Oh, Haymitch, I whisper. Thank you. He has not abandoned me. Not left me to fend entirely for myself. The cost of this medicine must be astronomical. Probably

not one but many sponsors have contributed to buy this one tiny pot. To me, it is priceless. I dip two fingers in the jar and gently spread the balm over my calf. The effect is almost magical, erasing the pain on contact, leaving a pleasant cooling sensation behind. This is no herbal concoction that my mother grinds up out of woodland plants, its high-tech medicine brewed up in the Capitols labs. When my calf is treated, I rub a thin layer into my hands. After wrapping the pot in the parachute, I nestle it safely away in my pack. Now that the pain has eased, its all I can do to reposition myself in my bag before I plunge into sleep. A bird perched just a few feet from me alerts me that a new day is dawning. In the gray morning light, I examine my hands. The medicine has transformed all the angry red patches to a soft baby-skin pink. My leg still feels inflamed, but that burn was far deeper.

I apply another coat of medicine and quietly pack up my gear. Whatever happens, Im going to have to move and move fast. I also make myself eat a cracker and a strip of beef and drink a few cups of water. Almost nothing stayed in my stomach yesterday, and Im already starting to feel the effects of hunger. Below me, I

can see the Career pack and Peeta asleep on the ground. By her position, leaning up against the trunk of the tree, Id guess Glimmer was supposed to be on guard, but fatigue overcame her. My eyes squint as they try to penetrate the tree next to me, but I cant make out Rue. Since she tipped me off, it only seems fair to warn her. Besides, if Im going to die today, its Rue I want to win. Even if it means a little extra food for my family, the idea of Peeta being crowned victor is unbearable. I call Rues name in a hushed whisper and the eyes appear, wide and alert, at once. She points up to the nest again. I hold up my knife and make a sawing motion. She nods and disappears. Theres a rustling in a nearby tree. Then the same noise again a bit farther off. I realize shes leaping from tree to tree. Its all I can do not to laugh out loud. Is this what she showed the Gamemakers? I imagine her flying around the training equipment never touching the floor. She should have gotten at least a ten. Rosy streaks are breaking through in the east. I cant afford to wait any longer. Compared to the agony of last nights climb, this one is a cinch. At the tree limb that holds the nest, I position the knife in the groove and Im about to draw the teeth across the wood when I see something moving. There, on the nest. The bright gold

gleam of a tracker jacker lazily making its way across the papery gray surface. No question, its acting a little subdued, but the wasp is up and moving and that means the others will be out soon as well. Sweat breaks out on the palms of my hands, beading up through the ointment, and I do my best to pat them dry on my shirt. If I dont get through this branch in a matter of seconds, the entire swarm could emerge and attack me. Theres no sense in putting it off. I take a deep breath, grip the knife handle and bear down as hard as I can. Back, forth, back, forth! The tracker jackers begin to buzz and I hear them coming out. Back, forth, back, forth! A stabbing pain shoots through my knee and I know one has found me and the others will be honing in. Back, forth, back, forth. And just as the knife cuts through, I shove the end of the branch as far away from me as I can. It crashes down through the lower branches, snagging temporarily on a few but then twisting free until it smashes with a thud on the ground. The nest bursts open like an egg, and a furious swarm of tracker jackers takes to the air. I feel a second sting on the cheek, a third on my neck, and their venom almost immediately makes me woozy. I cling to the tree with one arm while I rip the barbed stingers out of my flesh. Fortunately, only these three tracker jackers had

identified me before the nest went down. The rest of the insects have targeted their enemies on the ground. Its mayhem. The Careers have woken to a full-scale tracker jacker attack. Peeta and a few others have the sense to drop everything and bolt. I can hear cries of To the lake! To the lake! and know they hope to evade the wasps by taking to the water. It must be close if they think they can outdistance the furious insects. Glimmer and another girl, the one from District 4, are not so lucky. They receive multiple stings before theyre even out of my view. Glimmer appears to go completely mad, shrieking and trying to bat the wasps off with her bow, which is pointless. She calls to the others for help but, of course, no one returns. The girl from District 4 staggers out of sight, although I wouldnt bet on her making it to the lake. I watch Glimmer fall, twitch hysterically around on the ground for a few minutes, and then go still. The nest is nothing but an empty shell. The wasps have vanished in pursuit of the others. I dont think theyll return, but I dont want to risk it. I scamper down the tree and hit the ground running in the opposite direction of the lake. The poison from the stingers makes me wobbly, but I find my way back to my own little pool and submerge myself in the water, just in case any wasps are still on my trail.

After about five minutes, I drag myself onto the rocks. People have not exaggerated the effects of the tracker jacker stings. Actually, the one on my knee is closer to an orange than a plum in size. A foul-smelling green liquid oozes from the places where I pulled out the stingers. The swelling. The pain. The ooze. Watching Glimmer twitching to death on the ground. Its a lot to handle before the sun has even cleared the horizon. I dont want to think about what Glimmer must look like now. Her body disfigured. Her swollen fingers stiffening around the bow . . . The bow! Somewhere in my befuddled mind one thought connects to another and Im on my feet, teetering through the trees back to Glimmer. The bow. The arrows. I must get them. I havent heard the cannons fire yet, so perhaps Glimmer is in some sort of coma, her heart still struggling against the wasp venom. But once it stops and the cannon signals her death, a hovercraft will move in and retrieve her body, taking the only bow and sheath of arrows Ive seen out of the Games for good. And I refuse to let them slip through my fingers again! I reach Glimmer just as the cannon fires. The tracker jackers have vanished. This girl, so breathtakingly beautiful in her golden dress the night of the interviews, is unrecognizable. Her features eradicated, her

limbs three times their normal size. The stinger lumps have begun to explode, spewing putrid green liquid around her. I have to break several of what used to be her fingers with a stone to free the bow. The sheath of arrows is pinned under her back. I try to roll over her body by pulling on one arm, but the flesh disintegrates

in my hands and I fall back on the ground. Is this real? Or have the hallucinations begun? I squeeze my eyes tight and try to breathe through my mouth, ordering myself not to become sick. Breakfast must stay down, it might be days before I can hunt again. A second cannon fires and Im guessing the girl from District 4 has just died. I hear the birds fall silent and then one give the warning call, which means a hovercraft is about to appear. Confused, I think its for Glimmer, although this doesnt quite make sense because Im still in the picture, still fighting for the arrows. I lurch back onto my knees and the trees around me begin to spin in circles. In the middle of the sky, I spot the hovercraft. I throw myself over Glimmers body as if to protect it but then I see the girl from District 4 being lifted into the air and vanishing. Do this! I command myself. Clenching my jaw, I dig my hands under

Glimmers body, get a hold on what must be her rib cage, and force her onto her stomach. I cant help it, Im hyperventilating now, the whole thing is so nightmarish and Im losing my grasp on whats real. I tug on the silver sheath of arrows, but its caught on something, her shoulder blade, something, and finally yank it free. Ive just encircled the sheath with my arms when I hear the footsteps, several pairs, coming through the underbrush, and I realize the Careers have come back. Theyve come back to kill me or get their weapons or both. But its too late to run. I pull a slimy arrow from the sheath and try to position it on the bowstring but instead of one string I see three and the stench from the stings is so repulsive I cant do it. I cant do it. I cant do it. Im helpless as the first hunter crashes through the trees, spear lifted, poised to throw. The shock on Peetas face makes no sense to me. I wait for the blow. Instead his arm drops to his side. What are you still doing here? he hisses at me. I stare uncomprehendingly as a trickle of water drips off a sting under his ear. His whole body starts sparkling as if hes been dipped in dew. Are you mad? Hes prodding me with the shaft of the spear now. Get up! Get up! I rise, but hes still pushing at me. What? What is going on? He shoves me away from him hard. Run! he screams. Run!

Behind him, Cato slashes his way through the brush. Hes sparkling wet, too, and badly stung under one eye. I catch the gleam of sunlight on his sword and do as Peeta says. Holding tightly to my bow and arrows, banging into trees that appear out of nowhere, tripping and falling as I try to keep my balance. Back past my pool and into unfamiliar woods. The world begins to bend in alarming ways. A butterfly balloons to the size of a house then shatters into a million stars. Trees transform to blood and splash down over my boots. Ants begin to crawl out of the blisters on my hands and I cant shake them free. Theyre climbing up my arms, my neck. Someones screaming, a long high pitched scream that never breaks for breath. I have a vague idea

it might be me. I trip and fall into a small pit lined with tiny orange bubbles that hum like the tracker jacker nest. Tucking my knees up to my chin, I wait for death. Sick and disoriented, Im able to form only one thought: Peeta Mellark just saved my life. Then the ants bore into my eyes and I black out.

15. I enter a nightmare from which I wake repeatedly only to find a greater terror awaiting me. All the things I dread most, all the things I dread for others manifest in such vivid detail I cant help but believe theyre real. Each time I wake, I think, At last, this is over, but it isnt. Its only the beginning of a new chapter of torture. How many ways do I watch Prim die? Relive my fathers last moments? Feel my own body ripped apart? This is the nature of the tracker jacker venom, so carefully created to target the place where fear lives in your brain. When I finally do come to my senses, I lie still, waiting for the next onslaught of imagery. But eventually I accept that the poison must have finally worked its way out of my system, leaving my body wracked and feeble. Im still lying on my side, locked in the fetal position. I lift a hand to my eyes to find them sound, untouched by ants that never existed. Simply stretching out my limbs requires an enormous effort. So many parts of me hurt, it doesnt seem worthwhile taking inventory of them. Very, very slowly I manage to sit up. Im in a shallow hole, not filled with the humming orange bubbles of my hallucination but with old, dead leaves. My clothings damp, but I dont know whether pond water, dew, rain, or sweat is the cause. For a long time, all I can do is take tiny sips from my bottle

and watch a beetle crawl up the side of a honeysuckle bush. How long have I been out? It was morning when I lost reason. Now its afternoon. But the stiffness in my joints suggests more than a day has passed, even two possibly. If so, Ill have no way of knowing which tributes survived that tracker jacker attack. Not Glimmer or the girl from District 4. But there was the boy from District 1, both tributes from District 2, and Peeta. Did they die from the stings? Certainly if they lived, their last days must have been as horrid as my own. And what about Rue? Shes so small, it wouldnt take much venom to do her in. But then again . . . The tracker jackers wouldve had to catch her, and she had a good head start. A foul, rotten taste pervades my mouth, and the water has little effect on it. I drag myself over to the honeysuckle bush and pluck a flower. I gently pull the stamen through the blossom and set the drop of nectar on my tongue. The sweetness spreads through my mouth, down my throat, warming my veins with memories of summer, and my home woods and Gales presence beside me. For some reason, our discussion from that last morning comes back to me. We could do it, you know. What? Leave the district. Run off. Live in the woods. You and I, we could make it. And suddenly, Im not thinking of

Gale but of Peeta and . . .

Peeta! He saved my life! I think. Because by the time we met up, I couldnt tell what was real and what the tracker jacker venom had caused me to imagine. But if he did, and my instincts tell me he did, what for? Is he simply working the Lover Boy angle he initiated at the interview? Or was he actually trying to protect me? And if he was, what was he doing with those Careers in the first place? None of it makes sense. I wonder what Gale made of the incident for a moment and then I push the whole thing out of my mind because for some reason Gale and Peeta do not coexist well together in my thoughts. So I focus on the one really good thing thats happened since I landed in the arena. I have a bow and arrows! A full dozen arrows if you count the one I retrieved in the tree. They bear no trace of the noxious green slime that came from Glimmers body which leads me to believe that might not have been wholly real but they have a fair amount of dried blood on them. I can clean them later, but I do take a minute to shoot a few into a nearby tree. They are more like the weapons in the Training Center than my ones at home, but who cares? That I can work with. The

weapons give me an entirely new perspective on the Games. I know I have tough opponents left to face. But I am no longer merely prey that runs and hides or takes desperate measures. If Cato broke through the trees right now, I wouldnt flee, Id shoot. I find Im actually anticipating the moment with pleasure. But first, I have to get some strength back in my body. Im very dehydrated again and my water supply is dangerously low. The little padding I was able to put on by gorging myself during prep time in the Capitol is gone, plus several more pounds as well. My hip bones and ribs are more prominent than I remember them being since those awful months after my fathers death. And then there are my wounds to contend with burns, cuts, and bruises from smashing into the trees, and three tracker jacker stings, which are as sore and swollen as ever. I treat my burns with the ointment and try dabbing a bit on my stings as well, but it has no effect on them. My mother knew a treatment for them, some type of leaf that could draw out the poison, but she seldom had cause to use it, and I dont even remember its name let alone its appearance. Water first, I think. You can hunt along the way now. Its easy to see the direction I came from by the path of destruction my crazed body made through the foliage. So I walk off in the other

direction, hoping my enemies still lie locked in the surreal world of tracker jacker venom. I cant move too quickly, my joints reject any abrupt motions. But I establish the slow hunters tread I use when tracking game. Within a few minutes, I spot a rabbit and make my first kill with the bow and arrow. Its not my usual clean shot through the eye, but Ill take it. After about an hour, I find a stream, shallow but wide, and more than sufficient for my needs. The suns hot and severe, so while I

wait for my water to purify I strip down to my underclothes and wade into the mild current. Im filthy from head to toe, I try splashing myself but eventually just lay down in the water for a few minutes, letting it wash off the soot and blood and skin that has started to peel off my burns. After rinsing out my clothes and hanging them on bushes to dry, I sit on the bank in the sun for a bit, untangling my hair with my fingers. My appetite returns and I eat a cracker and a strip of beef. With a handful of moss, I polish the blood from my silver weapons. Refreshed, I treat my burns again, braid back my hair, and dress in the damp clothes, knowing the sun will dry them soon enough. Following the stream against its current seems the smartest course of

action. Im traveling uphill now, which I prefer, with a source of fresh water not only for myself but possible game. I easily take out a strange bird that must be some form of wild turkey. Anyway, it looks plenty edible to me. By late afternoon, I decide to build a small fire to cook the meat, betting that dusk will help conceal the smoke and I can quench the fire by nightfall. I clean the game, taking extra care with the bird, but theres nothing alarming about it. Once the feathers are plucked, its no bigger than a chicken, but its plump and firm. Ive just placed the first lot over the coals when I hear the twig snap. In one motion, I turn to the sound, bringing the bow and arrow to my shoulder. Theres no one there. No one I can see anyway. Then I spot the tip of a childs boot just peeking out from behind the trunk of a tree. My shoulders relax and I grin. She can move through the woods like a shadow, you have to give her that. How else could she have followed me? The words come out of my mouth before I can stop them. You know, theyre not the only ones who can form alliances, I say. For a moment, no response. Then one of Rues eyes edges around the trunk. You want me for an ally? Why not? You saved me with those tracker jackers. Youre smart enough to still be alive. And I cant seem to shake you anyway, I say. She blinks at me,

trying to decide. You hungry? I can see her swallow hard, her eye flickering to the meat. Come on then, Ive had two kills today. Rue tentatively steps out into the open. I can fix your stings. Can you? I ask. How? She digs in the pack she carries and pulls out a handful of leaves. Im almost certain theyre the ones my mother uses. Whered you find those? Just around. We all carry them when we work in the orchards. They left a lot of nests there, says Rue. There are a lot here, too. Thats right. Youre District Eleven. Agriculture, I say. Orchards, huh? That must be how you can fly around the trees like youve got wings. Rue smiles. Ive landed on one of the few things shell admit pride in. Well, come on, then. Fix me up. I plunk down by the fire and roll up my pant leg to reveal the sting on my knee. To my surprise, Rue places the handful of leaves into her mouth and begins to chew

them. My mother would use other methods, but its not like we have a lot of options. After a minute or so, Rue presses a gloppy green wad of chewed leaves and spit on my knee. Ohhh. The sound comes out of my mouth before I can stop it. Its as if the leaves are actually leaching the pain right out of the sting. Rue gives a giggle.

Lucky you had the sense to pull the stingers out or youd be a lot worse. Do my neck! Do my cheek! I almost beg. Rue stuffs another handful of leaves in her mouth, and soon Im laughing because the relief is so sweet. I notice a long burn on Rues forearm. Ive got something for that. I set aside my weapons and anoint her arm with the burn medicine. You have good sponsors, she says longingly. Have you gotten anything yet? I ask. She shakes her head. You will, though. Watch. The closer we get to the end, the more people will realize how clever you are. I turn the meat over. You werent joking, about wanting me for an ally? she asks. No, I meant it, I say. I can almost hear Haymitch groaning as I team up with this wispy child. But I want her. Because shes a survivor, and I trust her, and why not admit it? She reminds me of Prim. Okay, she says, and holds out her hand. We shake. Its a deal. Of course, this kind of deal can only be temporary, but neither of us mentions that. Rue contributes a big handful of some sort of starchy root to the meal. Roasted over the fire, they have the sharp sweet taste of a parsnip. She recognizes the bird, too, some wild thing they call a groosling in her district. She says sometimes a flock will wander into the orchard and they get a decent lunch that day. For a while, all conversation stops as

we fill our stomachs. The groosling has delicious meal thats so fatty, the grease drips down your face when you bite into it. Oh, says Rue with a sigh. Ive never had a whole leg to myself before. Ill bet she hasnt. Ill bet meat hardly ever comes her way. Take the other, I say. Really? she asks. Take whatever you want. Now that Ive got a bow and arrows, I can get more. Plus Ive got snares. I can show you how to set them, I say. Rue still looks uncertainly at the leg. Oh, take it, I say, putting the drumstick in her hands. It will only keep a few days anyway, and weve got the whole bird plus the rabbit. Once shes got hold of it, her appetite wins out and she takes a huge mouthful. Id have thought, in District Eleven, youd have a bit more to eat than us. You know, since you grow the food, I say. Rues eyes widen. Oh, no, were not allowed to eat the crops. They arrest you or something? I ask. They whip you and make everyone else watch, says Rue. The mayors very strict about it. I can tell by her expression that its not that uncommon an occurrence. A public whippings a rare thing in District 12, although occasionally one occurs. Technically, Gale and I could be whipped on a daily basis for poaching in the woods well, technically, we could get a whole lot worse except all the officials buy our meat. Besides, our


mayor, Madges father, doesnt seem to have much taste for such events. Maybe being the least prestigious, poorest, most ridiculed district in the country has its advantages. Such as, being largely ignored by the Capitol as long as we produce our coal quotas. Do you get all the coal you want? Rue asks. No, I answer. Just what we buy and whatever we track in on our boots. They feed us a bit extra during harvest, so that people can keep going longer, says Rue. Dont you have to be in school? I ask. Not during harvest. Everyone works then, says Rue. Its interesting, hearing about her life. We have so little communication with anyone outside our district. In fact, I wonder if the Gamemakers are blocking out our conversation, because even though the information seems harmless, they dont want people in different districts to know about one another. At Rues suggestion, we lay out all our food to plan ahead. Shes seen most of mine, but I add the last couple of crackers and beef strips to the pile. Shes gathered quite a collection of roots, nuts, greens, and even some berries. I roll an unfamiliar berry in my fingers. You sure this is safe? Oh, yes, we have them back home. Ive been eating them for days, she says, popping a handful in her mouth. I tentatively bite into one, and its as good as our blackberries. Taking Rue on as an ally

seems a better choice all the time. We divide up our food supplies, so in case were separated, well both be set for a few days. Apart from the food, Rue has a small water skin, a homemade slingshot, and an extra pair of socks. She also has a sharp shard of rock she uses as a knife. I know its not much, she says as if embarrassed, but I had to get away from the Cornucopia fast. You did just right, I say. When I spread out my gear, she gasps a little when she sees the sunglasses. How did you get those? she asks. In my pack. Theyve been useless so far. They dont block the sun and they make it harder to see, I say with a shrug. These arent for sun, theyre for darkness, exclaims Rue. Sometimes, when we harvest through the night, theyll pass out a few pairs to those of us highest in the trees. Where the torchlight doesnt reach. One time, this boy Martin, he tried to keep his pair. Hid it in his pants. They killed him on the spot. They killed a boy for taking these? I say. Yes, and everyone knew he was no danger. Martin wasnt right in the head. I mean, he still acted like a three-year-old. He just wanted the glasses to play with, says Rue. Hearing this makes me feel like District 12 is some sort of safe haven. Of course, people keel over from starvation all the time, but I cant imagine the Peacekeepers murdering a simpleminded child. Theres a little

girl, one of Greasy Saes grandkids, who wanders around the Hob. Shes not quite right, but shes treated as a sort of pet. People toss her scraps and things. So what do these do? I ask Rue, taking the glasses. They let you see in complete darkness, says Rue. Try them tonight when the sun goes

down. I give Rue some matches and she makes sure I have plenty of leaves in case my stings flare up again. We extinguish our fire and head upstream until its almost nightfall. Where do you sleep? I ask her. In the trees? She nods. In just your jacket? Rue holds up her extra pair of socks. I have these for my hands. I think of how cold the nights have been. You can share my sleeping bag if you want. Well both easily fit. Her face lights up. I can tell this is more than she dared hope for. We pick a fork high in a tree and settle in for the night just as the anthem begins to play. There were no deaths today. Rue, I only woke up today. How many nights did I miss? The anthem should block out our words, but still I whisper. I even take the precaution of covering my lips with my hand. I dont want the audience to know what Im planning to tell her about Peeta. Taking a cue from me, she does the same. Two, she says. The

girls from Districts One and Four are dead. Theres ten of us left. Something strange happened. At least, I think it did. It might have been the tracker jacker venom making me imagine things, I say. You know the boy from my district? Peeta? I think he saved my life. But he was with the Careers. Hes not with them now, she says. Ive spied on their base camp by the lake. They made it back before they collapsed from the stingers. But hes not there. Maybe he did save you and had to run. I dont answer. If, in fact, Peeta did save me, Im in his debt again. And this cant be paid back. If he did, it was all probably just part of his act. You know, to make people think hes in love with me. Oh, says Rue thoughtfully. I didnt think that was an act. Course it is, I say. He worked it out with our mentor. The anthem ends and the sky goes dark. Lets try out these glasses. I pull out the glasses and slip them on. Rue wasnt kidding. I can see everything from the leaves on the trees to a skunk strolling through the bushes a good fifty feet away. I could kill it from here if I had a mind to. I could kill anyone. I wonder who else got a pair of these, I say. The Careers have two pairs. But theyve got everything down by the lake, Rue says. And theyre so strong. Were strong, too, I say. Just in a different way. You are. You can shoot, she says. What can I do? You can feed

yourself. Can they? I ask. They dont need to. They have all those supplies, Rue says. Say they didnt. Say the supplies were gone. How long would they last? I say. I mean, its the Hunger Games, right? But, Katniss, theyre not hungry, says Rue. No, theyre not. Thats the problem, I agree. And for the first time, I have a plan. A plan that isnt motivated by the need for flight and evasion. An offensive plan. I think were going to have to fix that, Rue.

16.

Rue has decided to trust me wholeheartedly. I know this because as soon as the anthem finishes she snuggles up against me and falls asleep. Nor do I have any misgivings about her, as I take no particular precautions. If shed wanted me dead, all she

would have had to do was disappear from that tree without pointing out the tracker jacker nest. Needling me, at the very back of my mind, is the obvious. Both of us cant win these Games. But since the odds are still against either of us surviving, I manage to ignore the thought. Besides, Im distracted by my latest idea about the Careers and their supplies. Somehow Rue and I must find a way to destroy their food. Im pretty sure feeding themselves will be a tremendous struggle. Traditionally, the Career tributes strategy is to get hold of all the food early on and work from there. The years when they have not protected it well one year a pack of hideous reptiles destroyed it, another a Gamemakers flood washed it away those are usually the years that tributes from other districts have won. That the Careers have been better red growing up is actually to their disadvantage, because they dont know how to be hungry. Not the way Rue and I do. But Im too exhausted to begin any detailed plan tonight. My wounds recovering, my mind still a bit foggy from the venom, and the warmth of Rue at my side, her head cradled on my shoulder, have given me a sense of security. I realize, for the first time, how very lonely Ive been in the arena. How comforting the presence of another human being can be. I give in to my drowsiness, resolving that tomorrow the tables will turn. Tomorrow, its the Careers who will have to watch their backs. The boom of the cannon jolts me awake.

The skys streaked with light, the birds already chattering. Rue perches in a branch across from me, her hands cupping something. We wait, listening for more shots, but there arent any. Who do you think that was? I cant help thinking of Peeta. I dont know. It could have been any of the others, says Rue. I guess well know tonight. Whos left again? I ask. The boy from District One. Both tributes from Two. The boy from Three. Thresh and me. And you and Peeta, says Rue. Thats eight. Wait, and the boy from Ten, the one with the bad leg. He makes nine. Theres someone else, but neither of us can remember who it is. I wonder how that last one died, says Rue. No telling. But its good for us. A death should hold the crowd for a bit. Maybe well have time to do something before the Gamemakers decide things have been moving too slowly, I say. Whats in your hands? Breakfast, says Rue. She holds them out revealing two big eggs. What kind are those? I ask. Not sure. Theres a marshy area over that way. Some kind of waterbird, she says. Itd be nice to cook them, but neither of us wants to risk a fire. My guess is the tribute who died today was a victim of the Careers, which means theyve recovered enough to be back in the Games. We each suck out the insides of an egg, eat a rabbit leg and some berries. Its a good breakfast anywhere. Ready to do it? I say, pulling on my pack. Do what? says Rue, but by the way she bounces up, you can tell shes up for whatever I propose. Today we take out the Careers food, I say. Really?

How? You can see the glint of excitement in her eyes. In this way, shes exactly the opposite of Prim for whom adventures are an ordeal. No idea. Come on, well figure out a plan while we hunt, I say. We dont get much hunting done though because Im too busy getting every scrap of information I can out of Rue about the Careers base. Shes only been in to spy on them briefly, but shes observant. They have set up their camp beside the lake. Their supply stash is about thirty yards away. During the day, theyve been leaving another tribute, the boy from District 3, to watch over the supplies. The boy from District Three? I ask. Hes working with them? Yes, he stays at the camp full-time. He got stung, too, when they drew the tracker jackers in by the lake, says Rue. I guess they agreed to let him live if he acted as their guard. But hes not very big. What weapons does he have? I ask. Not much that I could see. A spear. He might be able to hold a few of us off with that, but Thresh could kill

him easily, says Rue. And the foods just out in the open? I say. She nods. Somethings not quite right about that whole setup. I know. But I couldnt tell what exactly, says Rue. Katniss, even if you could get to the food, how would you get rid of it? Burn it. Dump it in the lake. Soak it in fuel. I poke Rue in the belly, just like I would Prim. Eat it! She giggles. Dont worry, Ill think of something. Destroying things is much easier than making them. For a while, we dig roots, we gather berries and greens, we devise a strategy in hushed voices. And I come to know Rue, the oldest of six kids, fiercely protective of her siblings, who gives her rations to the younger ones, who forages in the meadows in a district where the Peacekeepers are far less obliging than ours. Rue, who when you ask her what she loves most in the world, replies, of all things, Music. Music? I say. In our world, I rank music somewhere between hair ribbons and rainbows in terms of usefulness. At least a rainbow gives you a tip about the weather. You have a lot of time for that? We sing at home. At work, too. Thats why I love your pin, she says, pointing to the mockingjay that Ive again forgotten about. You have mockingjays? I ask. Oh, yes. I have a few that are my special friends. We can sing back and forth for hours. They carry messages for me, she says. What do you mean? I say. Im usually up highest, so Im the first to see the flag that signals quitting time. Theres a special little song I do, says Rue. She opens her mouth and sings a little four-note run in a sweet, clear voice. And the mockingjays spread it around the orchard. Thats how everyone knows to knock off, she continues. They can be dangerous though, if you get too near their nests. But you cant blame them for that. I unclasp the pin and hold it out to her. Here, you take it. It has more meaning for you than me. Oh, no, says Rue, closing my fingers back over the pin. I like to see it on you. Thats how I decided I could trust you.

Besides, I have this. She pulls a necklace woven out of some kind of grass from her shirt. On it, hangs a roughly carved wooden star. Or maybe its a flower. Its a good luck charm. Well, its worked so far, I say, pinning the mockingjay back on my shirt. Maybe you should just stick with that. By lunch, we have a plan. By early afternoon, we are poised to carry it out. I help Rue collect and place the wood for the first two campfires, the third shell have time for on her own. We decide to meet afterward at the site where we ate our first meal together. The stream should help guide me back

to it. Before I leave, I make sure Rues well stocked with food and matches. I even insist she take my sleeping bag, in case its not possible to rendezvous by nightfall. What about you? Wont you be cold? she asks. Not if I pick up another bag down by the lake, I say. You know, stealing isnt illegal here, I say with a grin. At the last minute, Rue decides to teach me her mockingjay signal, the one she gives to indicate the days work is done. It might not work. But if you hear the mockingjays singing it, youll know Im okay, only I cant get back right away. Are there many mockingjays here? I ask. Havent you seen them? Theyve got nests everywhere, she says. I have to admit I havent noticed. Okay, then. If all goes according to plan, Ill see you for dinner, I say. Unexpectedly, Rue throws her arms around me. I only hesitate a moment before I hug her back. You be careful, she says to me. You, too, I say. I turn and head back to the stream, feeling somehow worried. About Rue being killed, about Rue not being killed and the two of us being left for last, about leaving Rue alone, about leaving Prim alone back home. No, Prim has my mother and Gale and a baker who has promised she wont go hungry. Rue has only me. Once I reach the stream, I have only to follow it downhill to the place I initially picked it up after the tracker jacker attack. I have to be cautious as I move along the water though, because I find my thoughts preoccupied with unanswered questions, most of which concern Peeta. The cannon that fired early this morning, did that signify his death? If so, how did he die? At the hand of a Career? And was that in revenge for letting me live? I struggle again to remember that moment over Glimmers body, when he burst through the trees. But just the fact that he was sparkling leads me to doubt everything that happened. I must have been moving very slowly yesterday because I reach the shallow stretch where I took my bath in just a few hours. I stop to replenish my water and add a layer of mud to my backpack. It seems bent on reverting to orange no matter how many times I cover it. My proximity to the Careers camp sharpens my senses, and the closer I get to them, the more guarded I am, pausing frequently to listen for unnatural sounds, an arrow already fitted into the string of my bow. I dont see any other tributes, but I do notice some of the things Rue has mentioned.

Patches of the sweet berries. A bush with the leaves that healed my stings. Clusters of tracker jacker nests in the vicinity of the tree I was trapped in. And here

and there, the black-and-white flash of a mockingjay wing in the branches high over my head. When I reach the tree with the abandoned nest at the foot, I pause a moment, to gather my courage. Rue has given specific instructions on how to reach the best spying place near the lake from this point. Remember, I tell myself. Youre the hunter now, not them. I get a firmer grasp on my bow and go on. I make it to the copse Rue has told me about and again have to admire her cleverness. Its right at the edge of the wood, but the bushy foliage is so thick down low I can easily observe the Career camp without being spotted. Between us lies the flat expanse where the Games began. There are four tributes. The boy from District 1, Cato and the girl from District 2, and a scrawny, ashen-skinned boy who must be from District 3. He made almost no impression on me at all during our time in the Capitol. I can remember almost nothing about him, not his costume, not his training score, not his interview. Even now, as he sits there fiddling with some kind of plastic box, hes easily ignored in the presence of his large and domineering companions. But he must be of some value or they wouldnt have bothered to let him live. Still, seeing him only adds to my sense of unease over why the Careers would possibly leave him as a guard, why they have allowed him to live at all. All four tributes seem to still be recovering from the tracker jacker attack. Even from here, I can see the large swollen lumps on their bodies. They must not have had the sense to remove the stingers, or if they did, not known about the leaves that healed them. Apparently, whatever medicines they found in the Cornucopia have been ineffective. The Cornucopia sits in its original position, but its insides have been picked clean. Most of the supplies, held in crates, burlap sacks, and plastic bins, are piled neatly in a pyramid in what seems a questionable distance from the camp. Others are sprinkled around the perimeter of the pyramid, almost mimicking the layout of supplies around the Cornucopia at the onset of the Games. A canopy of netting that, aside from discouraging birds, seems to be useless shelters the pyramid itself. The whole setup is completely perplexing. The distance, the netting, and the presence of the boy from District 3. One things for sure, destroying those supplies is not going to be as simple as it looks. Some other factor is at play here, and Id better stay put until I figure out what it is. My guess is the pyramid is booby-trapped in some manner. I think of concealed pits, descending nets, a thread that when broken sends a poisonous dart into your heart. Really, the

possibilities are endless. While I am mulling over my options, I hear Cato shout out. Hes pointing up to the woods, far beyond me, and without turning I know

that Rue must have set the first campfire. Wed made sure to gather enough green wood to make the smoke noticeable. The Careers begin to arm themselves at once. An argument breaks out. Its loud enough for me to hear that it concerns whether or not the boy from District 3 should stay or accompany them. Hes coming. We need him in the woods, and his jobs done here anyway. No one can touch those supplies, says Cato. What about Lover Boy? says the boy from District 1. I keep telling you, forget about him. I know where I cut him. Its a miracle he hasnt bled to death yet. At any rate, hes in no shape to raid us, says Cato. So Peeta is out there in the woods, wounded badly. But I am still in the dark on what motivated him to betray the Careers. Come on, says Cato. He thrusts a spear into the hands of the boy from District 3, and they head off in the direction of the fire. The last thing I hear as they enter the woods is Cato saying, When we find her, I kill her in my own way, and no one interferes. Somehow I dont think hes talking about Rue. She didnt drop a nest of acker jackers on him. I stay put for a half an hour or so, trying to figure out what to do about the supplies. The one advantage I have with the bow and arrow is distance. I could send a flaming arrow into the pyramid easily enough Im a good enough shot to get it through those openings in the net but theres no guarantee it would catch. More likely itd just burn itself out and then what? Id have achieved nothing and given them far too much information about myself. That I was here, that I have an accomplice, that I can use the bow and arrow with accuracy. Theres no alternative. Im going to have to get in closer and see if I cant discover what exactly protects the supplies. In fact, Im just about to reveal myself when a movement catches my eye. Several hundred yards to my right, I see someone emerge from the woods. For a second, I think its Rue, but then I recognize Foxface shes the one we couldnt remember this morning creeping out onto the plain. When she decides its safe, she runs for the pyramid, with quick, small steps. Just before she reaches the circle of supplies that have been littered around the pyramid, she stops, searches the ground, and carefully places her feet on a spot. Then she begins to approach the pyramid with strange little hops, sometimes landing on one foot, teetering slightly,

sometimes risking a few steps. At one point, she launches up in the air, over a small barrel and lands poised on her tiptoes. But she overshot slightly, and her momentum throws her forward. I hear her give a sharp squeal as her hands hit the ground, but nothing happens. In a moment, shes regained her feet and continues until she has reached the bulk of the supplies. So, Im right about the booby trap, but its clearly more complex than I had imagined. I was right about the girl, too. How wily is she to have discovered this path into the food and to be able to replicate it so neatly? She fills her

pack, taking a few items from a variety of containers, crackers from a crate, a handful of apples from a burlap sack that hangs suspended from a rope off the side of a bin. But only a handful from each, not enough to tip off that the food is missing. Not enough to cause suspicion. And then shes doing her odd little dance back out of the circle and scampering into the woods again, safe and sound. I realize Im grinding my teeth in frustration. Foxface has confirmed what Id already guessed. But what sort of trap have they laid that requires such dexterity? Has so many trigger points? Why did she squeal so as her hands made contact with the earth? Youd have thought . . . And slowly it begins to dawn on me . . . Youd have thought the very ground was going to explode. Its mined, I whisper. That explains everything. The Careers willingness to leave their supplies, Foxfaces reaction, the involvement of the boy from District 3, where they have the factories, where they make televisions and automobiles and explosives. But where did he get them? In the supplies? Thats not the sort of weapon the Gamemakers usually provide, given that they like to see the tributes draw blood personally. I slip out of the bushes and cross to one of the round metal plates that lifted the tributes into the arena. The ground around it has been dug up and patted back down. The land mines were disabled after the sixty seconds we stood on the plates, but the boy from District 3 must have managed to reactivate them. Ive never seen anyone in the Games do that. I bet it came as a shock even to the Gamemakers. Well, hurray for the boy from District 3 for putting one over on them, but what am I supposed to do now? Obviously, I cant go strolling into that mess without blowing myself sky-high. As for sending in a burning arrow, thats more laughable than ever. The mines are set off by pressure. It doesnt have to be a lot, either. One year, a girl

dropped her token, a small wooden ball, while she was at her plate, and they literally had to scrape bits of her off the ground. My arms pretty good, I might be able to chuck some rocks in there and set off what? Maybe one mine? That could start a chain reaction. Or could it? Would the boy from District 3 have placed the mines in such a way that a single mine would not disturb the others? Thereby protecting the supplies but ensuring the death of the invader. Even if I only blew up one mine, Id draw the Careers back down on me for sure. And anyway, what am I thinking? Theres that net, clearly strung to deflect any such attack. Besides, what Id really need is to throw about thirty rocks in there at once, setting off a big chain reaction, demolishing the whole lot. I glance back up at the woods. The smoke from Rues second fire is wafting toward the sky. By now, the Careers have probably begun to suspect some sort of trick. Time is running out. There is a solution to this, I know there is, if I can only focus hard enough. I stare at the pyramid, the

bins, the crates, too heavy to topple over with an arrow. Maybe one contains cooking oil, and the burning arrow idea is reviving when I realize I could end uplosing all twelve of my arrows and not get a direct hit on an oil bin, since Id just be guessing. Im genuinely thinking of trying to re-create Foxfaces trip up to the pyramid in hopes of finding a new means of destruction when my eyes light on the burlap bag of apples. I could sever the rope in one shot, didnt I do as much in the Training Center? Its a big bag, but it still might only be good for one explosion. If only I could free the apples themselves . . . I know what to do. I move into range and give myself three arrows to get the job done. I place my feet carefully, block out the rest of the world as I take meticulous aim, The first arrow tears through the side of the bag near the top, leaving a split in the burlap. The second widens it to a gaping hole. I can see the first apple teetering when I let the third arrow go, catching the torn flap of burlap and ripping it from the bag. For a moment, everything seems frozen in time. Then the apples spill to the ground and Im blown backward into the air.

17.

The impact with the hard-packed earth of the plain knocks the wind out of me.

My backpack does little to soften the blow. Fortunately my quiver has caught in the crook of my elbow, sparing both itself and my shoulder, and my bow is locked in my grasp. The ground still shakes with explosions. I cant hear them. I cant hear anything at the moment. But the apples must have set off enough mines, causing debris to activate the others. I manage to shield my face with my arms as shattered bits of matter, some of it burning, rain down around me. An acrid smoke fills the air, which is not the best remedy for someone trying to regain the ability to breathe. After about a minute, the ground stops vibrating. I roll on my side and allow myself a moment of satisfaction the sight of the smoldering wreckage that was recently the pyramid. The Careers arent likely to salvage anything out of that. Id better get out of here, I think. Theyll be making a beeline for the place. But once Im on my feet, I realize escape may not be so simple. Im dizzy. Not the slightly wobbly kind, but the kind that sends the trees swooping around you and causes the earth to move in waves under your feet. I take a few steps and somehow wind up on my hands and knees. I wait a few minutes to let it pass, but it doesnt. Panic begins to set in. I cant stay here. Flight is essential. But I can neither walk nor hear. I place a hand to my left ear, the

one that was turned toward the blast, and it comes away bloody. Have I gone deaf from the explosion? The idea frightens me. I rely as much on my ears as my eyes as a hunter, maybe more at times. But I cant let my fear show. Absolutely, positively, I am live on every screen in Panem. No blood trails, I tell myself, and manage to pull my hood up over my head, tie the cord under my chin with uncooperative

fingers. That should help soak up the blood. I cant walk, but can I crawl? I move forward tentatively. Yes, if I go very slowly, I can crawl. Most of the woods will offer insufficient cover. My only hope is to make it back to Rues copse and conceal myself in greenery. I cant get caught out here on my hands and knees in the open. Not only will I face death, its sure to be a long and painful one at Catos hand. The thought of Prim having to watch that keeps me doggedly inching my way toward the hideout. Another blast knocks me flat on my face. A stray mine, set off by some collapsing crate. This happens twice more. Im reminded of those last few kernels that burst when Prim and I pop corn over the fire at home. To say I make it in the nick of time is an understatement. I have literally just dragged myself into the tangle of hushes at

the base of the trees when theres Cato, barreling onto the plain, soon followed by his companions. His rage is so extreme it might be comical so people really do tear out their hair and beat the ground with their fists if I didnt know that it was aimed at me, at what I have done to him. Add to that my proximity, my inability to run or defend myself, and in fact, the whole thing has me terrified. Im glad my hiding place makes it impossible for the cameras to get a close shot of me because Im biting my nails like theres no tomorrow. Gnawing off the last bits of nail polish, trying to keep my teeth from chattering. The boy from District 3 throws stones into the ruins and must have declared all the mines activated because the Careers are approaching the wreckage. Cato has finished the first phase of his tantrum and takes out his anger on the smoking remains by kicking open various containers. The other tributes are poking around in the mess, looking for anything to salvage, but theres nothing. The boy from District 3 has done his job too well. This idea must occur to Cato, too, because he turns on the boy and appears to be shouting at him. The boy from District 3 only has time to turn and run before Cato catches him in a headlock from behind. I can see the muscles ripple in Catos arms as he sharply jerks the boys head to the side.

Its that quick. The death of the boy from District 3. The other two Careers seem to be trying to calm Cato down. I can tell he wants to return to the woods, but they keep pointing at the sky, which puzzles me until I realize, Of course. They think whoever set off the explosions is dead. They dont know about the arrows and the apples. They assume the booby trap was faulty, but that the tribute who blew up the supplies was killed doing it. If there was a cannon shot, it could have been easily lost in the subsequent explosions. The shattered remains of the thief removed by hovercraft. They retire to the far side of the lake to allow the Gamemakers to retrieve the body of the boy from District 3. And they wait. I suppose a cannon goes off. A hovercraft appears and takes the dead boy. The sun dips below

the horizon. Night falls. Up in the sky, I see the seal and know the anthem must have begun. A moment of darkness. They show the boy from District 3. They show the boy from District 10, who must have died this morning. Then the seal reappears. So, now they know. The bomber survived. In the seals light, I can see Cato and the girl from District 2 put on their night-vision glasses. The boy from District 1 ignites a

tree branch for a torch, illuminating the grim determination on all their faces. The Careers stride back into the woods to hunt. The dizziness has subsided and while my left ear is still deafened, I can hear a ringing in my right, which seems a good sign. Theres no point in leaving my hiding place, though. Im about as safe as I can be, here at the crime scene. They probably think the bomber has a two- or three-hour lead on them. Still its a long time before I risk moving. The first thing I do is dig out my own glasses and put them on, which relaxes me a little, to have at least one of my hunters senses working. I drink some water and wash the blood from my ear. Fearing the smell of meat will draw unwanted predators fresh blood is bad enough I make a good meal out of the greens and roots and berries Rue and I gathered today. Where is my little ally? Did she make it back to the rendezvous point? Is she worried about me? At least, the sky has shown were both alive. I run through the surviving tributes on my fingers. The boy from 1, both from 2, Foxface, both from 11 and 12. Just eight of us. The betting must be getting really hot in the Capitol. Theyll be doing special features on each of us now. Probably interviewing our friends and families. Its been a long time since a tribute from District 12 made it into the top eight. And now there are two

of us. Although from what Cato said, Peetas on his way out. Not that Cato is the final word on anything. Didnt he just lose his entire stash of supplies? Let the Seventy-fourth Hunger Games begin, Cato, I think. Let them begin for real. A cold breeze has sprung up. I reach for my sleeping bag before I remember I left it with Rue. I was supposed to pick up another one, but what with the mines and all, I forgot. I begin to shiver. Since roosting overnight in a tree isnt sensible anyway, I scoop out a hollow under the bushes and cover myself with leaves and pine needles. Im still freezing. I lay my sheet of plastic over my upper body and position my backpack to block the wind. Its a little better. I begin to have more sympathy for the girl from District 8 that lit the fire that first night. But now its me who needs to grit my teeth and tough it out until morning. More leaves, more pine needles. I pull my arms inside my jacket and tuck my knees up to my chest. Somehow, I drift off to sleep. When I open my eyes, the world looks slightly fractured, and it takes a minute to realize that the sun must be well up and the glasses fragmenting my vision. As I sit up and remove them, I hear a laugh somewhere near


the lake and freeze. The laughs distorted, but the fact that it registered at all means I must be regaining my hearing. Yes, my right ear can hear again, although its still ringing. As for my left ear, well, at least the bleeding has stopped. I peer through the bushes, afraid the Careers have returned, trapping me here for an indefinite time. No, its Foxface, standing in the rubble of the pyramid and laughing. Shes smarter than the Careers, actually finding a few useful items in the ashes. A metal pot. A knife blade. Im perplexed by her amusement until I realize that with the Careers stores eliminated, she might actually stand a chance. Just like the rest of us. It crosses my mind to reveal myself and enlist her as a second ally against that pack. But I rule it out. Theres something about that sly grin that makes me sure that befriending Foxface would ultimately get me a knife in the back. With that in mind, this might be an excellent time to shoot her. But shes heard something, not me, because her head turns away, toward the drop-off, and she sprints for the woods. I wait. No one, nothing shows up. Still, if Foxface thought it was dangerous, maybe its time for me to get out of here, too. Besides, Im eager to tell Rue about the pyramid. Since Ive no idea where the Careers are, the route back by the stream seems as good as any. I

hurry, loaded bow in one hand, a hunk of cold groosling in the other, because Im famished now, and not just for leaves and berries but for the fat and protein in the meat. The trip to the stream is uneventful. Once there, I refill my water and wash, taking particular care with my injured ear. Then I travel uphill using the stream as a guide. At one point, I find boot prints in the mud along the bank. The Careers have been here, but not for a while. The prints are deep because they were made in soft mud, but now theyre nearly dry in the hot sun. I havent been careful enough about my own tracks, counting on a light tread and the pine needles to conceal my prints. Now I strip off my boots and socks and go barefoot up the bed of the stream. The cool water has an invigorating effect on my body, my spirits. I shoot two fish, easy pickings in this slow-moving stream, and go ahead and eat one raw even though Ive just had the groosling. The second Ill save for Rue. Gradually, subtly, the ringing in my right ear diminishes until its gone entirely. I find myself pawing at my left ear periodically, trying to clean away whatever deadens its ability to collect sounds. If theres improvement, its undetectable. I cant adjust to deafness in the ear. It makes me feel off-balanced and defenseless to my left. Blind even. My head keeps turning to

the injured side, as my right ear tries to compensate for the wall of nothingness where yesterday there was a constant flow of information. The more time that passes, the less hopeful I am that this is an injury that will heal. When I reach the site of our first meeting, I feel certain its been

undisturbed. Theres no sign of Rue, not on the ground or in the trees. This is odd. By now she should have returned, as its midday. Undoubtedly, she spent the night in a tree somewhere. What else could she do with no light and the Careers with their night-vision glasses tramping around the woods. And the third fire she was supposed to set although I forgot to check for it last night was the farthest from our site of all. Shes probably just being cautious about making her way back. I wish shed hurry, because I dont want to hang around here too long. I want to spend the afternoon traveling to higher ground, hunting as we go. But theres nothing really for me to do but wait. I wash the blood out of my jacket and hair and clean my ever-growing list of wounds. The burns are much better but I use a bit of medicine on them anyway. The main thing to worry about now is keeping out infection. I go ahead andeat the second fish. It isnt going to last long in this hot sun, but it should be easy enough to spear a few more for Rue. If she would just show up. Feeling too vulnerable on the ground with my lopsided hearing, I scale a tree to wait. If the Careers show up, this will be a fine place to shoot them from. The sun moves slowly. I do things to pass the time. Chew leaves and apply them to my stings that are deflated but still tender. Comb through my damp hair with my fingers and braid it. Lace my boots back up. Check over my bow and remaining nine arrows. Test my left ear repeatedly for signs of life by rustling a leaf near it, but without good results. Despite the groosling and the fish, my stomachs growling, and I know Im going to have what we call a hollow day back in District 12. Thats a day where no matter what you put in your belly, its never enough. Having nothing to do but sit in a tree makes it worse, so I decide to give into it. After all, Ive lost a lot of weight in the arena, I need some extra calories. And having the bow and arrows makes me far more confident about my future prospects. I slowly peel and eat a handful of nuts. My last cracker. The groosling neck. Thats good because it takes time to pick clean. Finally, a groosling wing and the bird is history. But its a hollow day, and even with all that I start daydreaming about food.

Particularly the decadent dishes served in the Capitol. The chicken in creamy orange sauce. The cakes and pudding. Bread with butter. Noodles in green sauce. The lamb and dried plum stew. I suck on a few mint leaves and tell myself to get over it. Mint is good because we drink mint tea after supper often, so it tricks my stomach into thinking eating time is over. Sort of. Dangling up in the tree, with the sun warming me, a mouthful of mint, my bow and arrows at hand . . . This is the most relaxed Ive been since Ive entered the arena. If only Rue would show up, and we could clear out. As the shadows grow, so does my restlessness. By late afternoon, Ive resolved to go looking for her. I can at least visit the spot

where she set the third fire and see if there are any clues to her whereabouts. Before I go, I scatter a few mint leaves around our old campfire. Since we gathered these some distance away, Rue will understand Ive been here, while theyll mean nothing to the Careers. In less than an hour, Im at the place where we agreed to have the third fire and I know something has gone amiss. The wood has been neatly arranged, expertly interspersed with tinder, but it has never been lit. Rue set up thefire but never made it back here. Somewhere between the second column of smoke I spied before I blew up the supplies and this point, she ran into trouble. I have to remind myself shes still alive. Or is she? Could the cannon shot announcing her death have come in the wee hours of the morning when even my good ear was too broken to pick it up? Will she appear in the sky tonight? No, I refuse to believe it. There could be a hundred other explanations. She could have lost her way. Run into a pack of predators or another tribute, like Thresh, and had to hide. Whatever happened, Im almost certain shes stuck out there, somewhere between the second fire and the unlit one at my feet. Something is keeping her up a tree. I think Ill go hunt it down. Its a relief to be doing something after sitting around all afternoon. I creep silently through the shadows, letting them conceal me. But nothing seems suspicious. Theres no sign of any kind of struggle, no disruption of the needles on the ground. Ive stopped for just a moment when I hear it. I have to cock my head around to the side to be sure, but there it is again. Rues four-note tune coming out of a mockingjays mouth. The one that means shes all right. I grin and move in the direction of the bird. Another just a short distance ahead, picks up on the handful of notes. Rue has been

singing to them, and recently. Otherwise theyd have taken up some other song. My eyes lift up into the trees, searching for a sign of her. I swallow and sing softly back, hoping shell know its safe to join me. A mockingjay repeats the melody to me. And thats when I hear the scream. Its a childs scream, a young girls scream, theres no one in the arena capable of making that sound except Rue. And now Im running, knowing this may be a trap, knowing the three Careers may be poised to attack me, but I cant help myself. Theres another high-pitched cry, this time my name. Katniss! Katniss! Rue! I shout back, so she knows Im near. So, they know Im near, and hopefully the girl who has attacked them with tracker jackers and gotten an eleven they still cant explain will be enough to pull their attention away from her. Rue! Im coming! When I break into the clearing, shes on the ground, hopelessly entangled in a net. She just has time to reach her hand through the mesh and say my name before the spear enters her body.

18.

The boy from District 1 dies before he can pull out the spear. My arrow drives deeply into the center of his neck. He falls to his knees and

halves the brief remainder of his life by yanking out the arrow and drowning in his own blood. Im reloaded, shifting my aim from side to side, while I shout at Rue, Are there more? Are there more? She has to say no several times before I hear it. Rue has rolled to her side, her body curved in and around the spear. I shove the boy away from her and pull out my knife, freeing her from the net. One look at the wound and I know its far beyond my capacity to heal, beyond anyones probably. The spearhead is buried up to the shaft in her stomach. I crouch before her, staring helplessly at the embedded weapon. Theres no point in comforting words, in telling her shell be all right. Shes no fool. Her hand reaches out and I clutch it like a lifeline. As if its me whos dying instead of Rue. You blew up the food? she whispers. Every last bit, I say. You have to win, she says. Im going to. Going to win for both of us now, I promise. I hear a cannon and look up. It must be for the boy from District 1. Dont go. Rue tightens her grip on my hand. Course not. Staying right here, I say. I move in closer

to her, pulling her head onto my lap. I gently brush the dark, thick hair back behind her ear. Sing, she says, but I barely catch the word. Sing? I think. Sing what? I do know a few songs. Believe it or not, there was once music in my house, too. Music I helped make. My father pulled me in with that remarkable voice but I havent sung much since he died. Except when Prim is very sick. Then I sing her the same songs she liked as a baby. Sing. My throat is tight with tears, hoarse from smoke and fatigue. But if this is Prims, I mean, Rues last request, I have to at least try. The song that comes to me is a simple lullaby, one we sing fretful, hungry babies to sleep with, Its old, very old I think. Made up long ago in our hills. What my music teacher calls a mountain air. But the words are easy and soothing, promising tomorrow will be more hopeful than this awful piece of time we call today. I give a small cough, swallow hard, and begin:

Deep in the meadow, under the willowA bed of grass, a soft green pillowLay down your head, and close your sleepy eyesAnd when again they open, the sun will rise.Here its safe, here its warmHere the daisies guard you from every harmHere your dreams are sweet and tomorrow brings them trueHere is the place where I love you.

Rues eyes have fluttered shut. Her chest moves but only slightly. My throat releases the tears and they slide down my cheeks. But I have to finish the song for her.

Deep in the meadow, hidden far awayA cloak of leaves, a moonbeam rayForget your woes and let your troubles layAnd when again its morning, theyll wash away.

Here its safe, here its warmHere the daisies guard you from every harm

The final lines are barely audible.

Here your dreams are sweet and tomorrow brings them trueHere is the place where I love you.

Everythings still and quiet. Then, almost eerily, the mockingjays take up my song. For a moment, I sit there, watching my tears drip down on her face. Rues cannon fires. I lean forward and press my lips against her temple. Slowly, as if not to wake her, I lay her head back on the ground and release her hand. Theyll want me to clear out now. So they can collect the bodies. And theres nothing to stay for. I roll the boy from District 1 onto his face and take his pack, retrieve the arrow that ended his life. I cut Rues pack from her back as well, knowing shed want me to have it but leave the spear in her stomach. Weapons in bodies will be transported to the hovercraft. Ive no use for a spear, so the sooner its gone from the arena the better. I cant stop looking at Rue, smaller than ever, a baby animal curled up in a nest of netting. I cant bring myself to leave her like this. Past harm, but seeming utterly defenseless. To hate the boy from District 1, who also appears so vulnerable in death, seems inadequate. Its the Capitol I hate, for doing this to all of us. Gales voice is in my head. His ravings against the Capitol no longer pointless, no longer to be ignored. Rues death has forced me to confront my own fury against the cruelty, the injustice they inflict upon us. But here, even more strongly than at home, I feel my impotence.

Theres no way to take revenge on the Capitol. Is there? Then I remember Peetas words on the roof. Only I keep wishing I could think of a way to . . . To show the Capital they dont own me. That Im more than just a piece in their Games. And for the first time, I understand what he means. I want to do something, right here, right now, to shame them, to make them accountable, to show the Capitol that whatever they do or force us to do there is a part of every tribute they cant own. That Rue was more than a piece in their Games. And so am I. A few steps into the woods grows a bank of wildflowers. Perhaps they are really weeds of some sort, but they have blossoms in beautiful shades of violet and yellow and white. I gather up an armful and come back to Rues side. Slowly, one stem at a time, I decorate her body in the flowers. Covering the ugly wound. Wreathing her face. Weaving her hair with bright colors. Theyll have to show it. Or, even if they choose to turn the cameras elsewhere at this moment, theyll have to bring them back when they collect the bodies and everyone will see her then and know I did it. I step back and take a last look at Rue. She could really be asleep in that meadow after all. Bye, Rue, I whisper. I press the three middle fingers of my left hand against my lips and hold them out in her

direction. Then I walk away without looking back. The birds fall silent. Somewhere, a mockingjay gives the warning whistle that precedes the hovercraft. I dont know how it knows. It must hear

things that humans cant. I pause, my eyes focused on whats ahead, not whats happening behind me. It doesnt take long, then the general birdsong begins again and I know shes gone. Another mockingjay, a young one by the look of it, lands on a branch before me and bursts out Rues melody. My song, the hovercraft, were too unfamiliar for this novice to pick up, but it has mastered her handful of notes. The ones that mean shes safe. Good and safe, I say as I pass under its branch. We dont have to worry about her now. Good and safe. Ive no idea where to go. The brief sense of home I had that one night with Rue has vanished. My feet wander this way and that until sunset. Im not afraid, not even watchful. Which makes me an easy target. Except Id kill anyone I met on sight. Without emotion or the slightest tremor in my hands. My hatred of the Capitol has not lessened my hatred of my competitors in the least. Especially the Careers. They, at least, can be made to pay for Rues death. No one materializes though. There arent many of us left and its a big arena. Soon theyll be pulling out some other device to force us together. But theres been enough gore today. Perhaps well even get to sleep. Im about to haul my packs into a tree to make camp when a silver parachute floats down and lands in front of me. A gift from a sponsor. But why now? Ive been in fairly good shape with supplies. Maybe Haymitchs noticed my despondency and is trying to cheer me up a bit. Or could it be something to help my ear? I open the parachute and find a small loaf of bread Its not the fine white Capitol stuff. Its made of dark ration grain and shaped in a crescent. Sprinkled with seeds. I flash back to Peetas lesson on the various district breads in the Training Center. This bread came from District 11. I cautiously lift the still warm loaf. What must it have cost the people of District 11 who cant even feed themselves? How many wouldve had to do without to scrape up a coin to put in the collection for this one loaf? It had been meant for Rue, surely. But instead of pulling the gift when she died, theyd authorized Haymitch to give it to me. As a thank-you? Or because, like me, they dont like to let debts go unpaid? For whatever reason, this is a first. A district gift to a tribute whos not your own. I lift my face and step into the last falling rays of

sunlight. My thanks to the people of District Eleven, I say. I want them to know I know where it came from. That the full value of their gift has been recognized. I climb dangerously high into a tree, not for safety but to get as far away from today as I can. My sleeping bag is rolled neatly in Rues pack. Tomorrow Ill sort through the supplies. Tomorrow Ill make a new plan. But tonight, all I can do is strap myself in and take tiny bites of the bread. Its good. It tastes of home. Soon the seals in the sky, the anthem plays in my right ear. I see the boy from District 1, Rue. Thats all for tonight. Six of us left, I think. Only six. With

the bread still locked in my hands, I fall asleep at once. Sometimes when things are particularly bad, my brain will give me a happy dream. A visit with my father in the woods. An hour of sunlight and cake with Prim. Tonight it sends me Rue, still decked in her flowers, perched in a high sea of trees, trying to teach me to talk to the mockingjays. I see no sign of her wounds, no blood, just a bright, laughing girl. She sings songs Ive never heard in a clear, melodic voice. On and on. Through the night. Theres a drowsy in-between period when I can hear the last few strains of her music although shes lost in the leaves. When I fully awaken, Im momentarily comforted. I try to hold on to the peaceful feeling of the dream, but it quickly slips away, leaving me sadder and lonelier than ever. Heaviness infuses my whole body, as if theres liquid lead in my veins. Ive lost the will to do the simplest tasks, to do anything but lie here, staring unblinkingly through the canopy of leaves. For several hours, I remain motionless. As usual, its the thought of Prims anxious face as she watches me on the screens back home that breaks me from my lethargy. I give myself a series of simple commands to follow, like Now you have to sit up, Katniss. Now you have to drink water, Katniss. I act on the orders with slow, robotic motions. Now you have to sort the packs, Katniss. Rues pack holds my sleeping bag, her nearly empty water skin, a handful of nuts and roots, a bit of rabbit, her extra socks, and her slingshot. The boy from District 1 has several knives, two spare spearheads, a flashlight, a small leather pouch, a first-aid kit, a full bottle of water, and a pack of dried fruit. A pack of dried fruit! Out of all he might have chosen from. To me, this is a sign of extreme arrogance. Why bother to carry food when you have such a bounty back at camp? When you will kill your enemies so quickly youll be home before youre

hungry? I can only hope the other Careers traveled so lightly when it came to food and now find themselves with nothing. Speaking of which, my own supply is running low. I finish off the loaf from District 11 and the last of the rabbit. How quickly the food disappears. All I have left are Rues roots and nuts, the boys dried fruit, and one strip of beef. Now you have to hunt, Katniss, I tell myself. I obediently consolidate the supplies I want into my pack. After I climb down the tree, I conceal the boys knives and spearheads in a pile of rocks so that no one else can use them. Ive lost my bearings what with all the wandering around I did yesterday evening, but I try and head back in the general direction of the stream. I know Im on course when I come across Rues third, unlit fire. Shortly thereafter, I discover a flock of grooslings perched in the trees and take out three before they know what hit them. I return to Rues signal fire and start it up, not caring about the excessive smoke. Where are you, Cato? I think as I roast the birds and Rues roots. Im

waiting right here. Who knows where the Careers are now? Either too far to reach me or too sure this is a trick or ... Is it possible? Too scared of me? They know I have the bow and arrows, of course, Cato saw me take them from Glimmers body, but have they put two and two together yet? Figured out I blew up the supplies and killed their fellow Career? Possibly they think Thresh did this. Wouldnt he be more likely to revenge Rues death than I would? Being from the same district? Not that he ever took any interest in her. And what about Foxface? Did she hang around to watch me blow up the supplies? No. When I caught her laughing in the ashes the next morning, it was as if someone had given her a lovely surprise. I doubt they think Peeta has lit this signal fire. Catos sure hes as good as dead. I find myself wishing I could tell Peeta about the flowers I put on Rue. That I now understand what he was trying to say on the roof. Perhaps if he wins the Games, hell see me on victors night, when they replay the highlights of the Games on a screen over the stage where we did our interviews. The winner sits in a place of honor on the platform, surrounded by their support crew. But I told Rue Id be there. For both of us. And somehow that seems even more important than the vow I gave Prim. I really think I stand a chance of doing it now.


Winning. Its not just having the arrows or outsmarting the Careers a few times, although those things help. Something happened when I was holding Rues hand, watching the life drain out of her. Now I am determined to revenge her, to make her loss unforgettable, and I can only do that by winning and thereby making myself unforgettable. I overcook the birds hoping someone will show up to shoot, but no one does. Maybe the other tributes are out there beating one another senseless. Which would be fine, Ever since the bloodbath, Ive been featured on screens most than I care. Eventually, I wrap up my food and go back to the stream to replenish my water and gather some. But the heaviness from the morning drapes back over me and even though its only early evening, I climb a tree and settle in for the night. My brain begins to replay the events from yesterday. I keep seeing Rue speared, my arrow piercing the boys neck. I dont know why I should even care about the boy. Then I realize . . . He was my first kill. Along with other statistics they report to help people place their bets, every tribute has a list of kills. I guess technically Id get credited for Glimmer and the girl from District 4, too, for dumping that nest on them. But the boy from District 1 was the first person I knew would die because of my actions.Numerous animals have lost their lives at my hands, but only one human. I hear Gale saying, How different can it be, really? Amazingly similar in the execution. A bow pulled, an arrow shot. Entirely different in the aftermath. I killed a boy whose name I dont even know. Somewhere his family is weeping for him. His friends

call for my blood. Maybe he had a girlfriend who really believed he would come back . . . But then I think of Rues still body and Im able to banish the boy from my mind. At least, for now. Its been an uneventful day according to the sky. No deaths. I wonder how long well get until the next catastrophe drives us back together. If its going to be tonight, I want to get some sleep first. I cover my good ear to block out the strains of the anthem, but then I hear the trumpets and sit straight up in anticipation. For the most part, the only communication the tributes get from outside the arena is the nightly death toll. But occasionally, there will be trumpets followed by an announcement. Usually, this will be a call to a feast. When food is scarce, the Gamemakers will invite the players to a banquet, somewhere known to all like the Cornucopia, as an inducement to gather and fight. Sometimes there is a feast

and sometimes theres nothing but a loaf of stale bread for the tributes to compete for. I wouldnt go in for the food, but this could be an ideal time to take out a few competitors. Claudius Templesmiths voice booms down from overhead, congratulating the six of us who remain. But he is not inviting us to a feast. Hes saying something very confusing. Theres been a rule change in the Games. A rule change! That in itself is mind bending since we dont really have any rules to speak of except dont step off your circle for sixty seconds and the unspoken rule about not eating one another. Under the new rule, both tributes from the same district will be declared winners if they are the last two alive. Claudius pauses, as if he knows were not getting it, and repeats the change again. The news sinks in. Two tributes can win this year. If theyre from the same district. Both can live. Both of us can live. Before I can stop myself, I call out Peetas name.

PART III"THE VICTOR"

19.I clap my hands over my mouth, but the sound has already escaped. The sky goes black and I hear a chorus of frogs begin to sing. Stupid! I tell myself. What a stupid thing to do! I wait, frozen, for the woods to come alive with assailants. Then I remember theres almost no one left. Peeta, whos been wounded, is now my ally. Whatever doubts Ive had about him dissipate because if either of us took the others life now wed be pariahs when we returned to District 12. In fact, I know if I was watching Id loathe any tribute who didnt immediately ally with their district partner. Besides, it just makes sense to protect each other. And in my case being one of the star-crossed lovers from District 12 its an absolute requirement if I want any more help from sympathetic sponsors. The star-crossed lovers . . . Peeta must have been playing that angle all along. Why else would the Gamemakers have made this unprecedented change in the rules? For two tributes to have a shot at winning, our romance must be so popular with the audience that condemning it would jeopardize the success of the Games. No

thanks to me. All Ive done is managed not to kill Peeta. But whatever hes done

in the arena, he must have the audience convinced it was to keep me alive. Shaking his head to keep me from running to the Cornucopia. Fighting Cato to let me escape. Even hooking up with the Careers must have been a move to protect me. Peeta, it turns out, has never been a danger to me. The thought makes me smile. I drop my hands and hold my face up to the moonlight so the cameras can be sure to catch it. So, who is there left to be afraid of? Foxface? The boy tribute from her district is dead. Shes operating alone, at night. And her strategy has been to evade, not attack. I dont really think that, even if she heard my voice, shed do anything but hope someone else would kill me. Then theres Thresh. All right, hes a distinct threat. But I havent seen him, not once, since the Games began. I think about how Foxface grew alarmed when she heard a sound at the site of the explosion. But she didnt turn to the Woods, she turned to whatever lies across from it. To that area of the arena that drops off into I dont know what. I feel almost certain that the person she ran from was Thresh and that is his domain. Hed never have heard me from there and, even if he did, Im up too high for someone his size to reach. So that leaves Cato and the girl from District 2, who are now surely celebrating the new rule. Theyre the only

ones left who benefit from it besides Peeta and myself. Do I run from them now, on the chance they heard me call Peetas name? No, I think. Let them come. Let them come with their night-vision glasses and their heavy, branch-breaking bodies. Right into the range of my arrows. But I know they wont. If they didnt come in daylight to my fire, they wont risk what could be another trap at night. When they come, it will be on their own terms, not because Ive let them know my whereabouts. Stay put and get some sleep, Katniss, I instruct myself, although I wish I could start tracking Peeta now. Tomorrow, youll find him. I do sleep, but in the morning Im extra-cautious, thinking that while the Careers might hesitate to attack me in a tree, theyre completely capable of setting an ambush for me. I make sure to fully prepare myself for the day eating a big breakfast, securing my pack, readying my weapons before I descend. But all seems peaceful and undisturbed on the ground. Today Ill have to be scrupulously careful. The Careers will know Im trying to locate Peeta. They may well want to wait until I do before they move in. If hes as badly wounded as Cato thinks, Id be in the position of having to defend us both without any assistance. But if hes that incapacitated, how has he managed to stay alive? And how on earth will I find him? I

try to think of anything Peeta ever said that might give me an indication as to where hes hiding out, but nothing rings a bell. So I go back to the last moment I saw him sparkling in the sunlight, yelling at me to run. Then Cato appeared, his

sword drawn. And after I was gone, he wounded Peeta. But how did Peeta get away? Maybe hed held out better against the tracker jacker poison than Cato. Maybe that was the variable that allowed him to escape. But hed been stung, too. So how far could he have gotten, stabbed and filled with venom? And how has he stayed alive all these days since? If the wound and the stingers havent killed him, surely thirst would have taken him by now. And thats when I get my first clue to his whereabouts. He couldnt have survived without water. I know that from my first few days here. He must be hidden somewhere near a source. Theres the lake, but I find that an unlikely option since its so close to the Careers base camp. A few spring-fed pools. But youd really be a sitting duck at one of those. And the stream. The one that leads from the camp Rue and I made all the way down near the lake and beyond. If he stuck to the stream, he could change his location and always be near water. He could walk in the

current and erase any tracks. He might even be able to get a fish or two. Well, its a place to start, anyway. To confuse my enemies minds, I start a fire with plenty of green wood. Even if they think its a ruse, I hope theyll decide Im hidden somewhere near it. While in reality, Ill be tracking Peeta. The sun burns off the morning haze almost immediately and I can tell the day will be hotter than usual. The waters cool and pleasant on my bare feet as I head downstream. Im tempted to call out Peetas name as I go but decide against it. I will have to find him with my eyes and one good ear or he will have to find me. But hell know Ill be looking, right? He wont have so low of an opinion of me as to think Id ignore the new rule and keep to myself. Would he? Hes very hard to predict, which might be interesting under different circumstances, but at the moment only provides an extra obstacle. It doesnt take long to reach the spot where I peeled off to go the Careers camp. Theres been no sign of Peeta, but this doesnt surprise me. Ive been up and down this stretch three times since the tracker jacker incident. If he were nearby, surely Id have had some suspicion of it. The stream begins to curve to the left into a part of the woods thats new to me. Muddy banks covered in tangled water plants lead to large rocks that increase in size until I

begin to feel somewhat trapped. It would be no small matter to escape the stream now. Fighting off Cato or Thresh as I climbed over this rocky terrain. In fact, Ive just about decided Im on the wrong track entirely, that a wounded boy would be unable to navigate getting to and from this water source, when I see the bloody streak going down the curve of a boulder. Its long dried now, but the smeary lines running side to side suggest someone who perhaps was not fully in control of his mental faculties tried to wipe it away. Hugging the rocks, I move slowly in the direction of the blood, searching for him. I find a few more bloodstains, one

with a few threads of fabric glued to it, but no sign of life. I break down and say his name in a hushed voice. Peeta! Peeta! Then a mockingjay lands on a scruffy tree and begins to mimic my tones so I stop. I give up and climb back down to the stream thinking, He must have moved on. Somewhere farther down. My foot has just broken the surface of the water when I hear a voice. You here to finish me off, sweetheart? I whip around. Its come from the left, so I cant pick it up very well. And the voice was hoarse and weak. Still, it must have been Peeta. Who else in the arena would call me

sweetheart? My eyes peruse the bank, but theres nothing. Just mud, the plants, the base of the rocks. Peeta? I whisper. Where are you? Theres no answer. Could I just have imagined it? No, Im certain it was real and very close at hand, too. Peeta? I creep along the bank. Well, dont step on me. I jump back. His voice was right under my feet. Still theres nothing. Then his eyes open, unmistakably blue in the brown mud and green leaves. I gasp and am rewarded with a hint of white teeth as he laughs. Its the final word in camouflage. Forget chucking weights around. Peeta should have gone into his private session with the Gamemakers and painted himself into a tree. Or a boulder. Or a muddy bank full of weeds. Close your eyes again, I order. He does, and his mouth, too, and completely disappears. Most of what I judge to be his body is actually under a layer of mud and plants. His face and arms are so artfully disguised as to be invisible. I kneel beside him. I guess all those hours decorating cakes paid off. Peeta smiles. Yes, frosting. The final defense of the dying. Youre not going to die, I tell him firmly. Says who? His voice is so ragged. Says me. Were on the same team now, you know, I tell him. His eyes open. So, I heard. Nice of you to find whats left of me. I pull out my water bottle and give him a drink. Did Cato cut you? I ask. Left leg.

Up high, he answers. Lets get you in the stream, wash you off so I can see what kind of wounds youve got, I say. Lean down a minute first, he says. Need to tell you something. I lean over and put my good ear to his lips, which tickle as he whispers. Remember, were madly in love, so its all right to kiss me anytime you feel like it. I jerk my head back but end up laughing. Thanks, Ill keep it in mind. At least, hes still able to joke around. But when I start to help him to the stream, all the levity disappears. Its only two feet away, how hard can it be? Very hard when I realize hes unable to move an inch on his own. Hes so weak that the best he can do is not to resist. I try to drag him, but despite the fact that I know hes doing all he can to keep quiet, sharp cries of pain escape him. The mud and plants seem to have imprisoned him and I finally have to give a gigantic tug to break him from their clutches. Hes still two feet from the water, lying there, teeth gritted, tears cutting trails in the dirt on his face. Look, Peeta, Im

going to roll you into the stream. Its very shallow here, okay? I say. Excellent, he says. I crouch down beside him. No matter what happens, I tell myself, dont stop

until hes in the water. On three, I say. One, two, three! I can only manage one full roll before I have to stop because of the horrible sound hes making. Now hes on the edge of the stream. Maybe this is better anyway. Okay, change of plans. Im not going to put you all the way in, I tell him. Besides, if I get him in, who knows if Id ever be able to get him out? No more rolling? he asks. Thats all done. Lets get you cleaned up. Keep an eye on the woods for me, okay? I say. Its hard to know where to start. He so caked with mud and matted leaves, I cant even see his clothes. If hes wearing clothes. The thought makes me hesitate a moment, but then I plunge in. Naked bodies are no big deal in the arena, right? Ive got two water bottles and Rues water skin. I prop them against rocks in the stream so that two are always filling while I pour the third over Peetas body. It takes a while, but I finally get rid of enough mud to find his clothes. I gently unzip his jacket, unbutton his shirt and ease them off him. His undershirt is so plastered into his wounds I have to cut it away with my knife and drench him again to work it loose. Hes badly bruised with a long burn across his chest and four tracker jacker stings, if you count the one under his ear. But I feel a bit better. This much I can fix. I decide to take care of his upper body first, to alleviate

some pain, before I tackle whatever damage Cato did to his leg. Since treating his wounds seems pointless when hes lying in whats become a mud puddle, I manage to prop him up against a boulder. He sits there, uncomplaining, while I wash away all the traces of dirt from his hair and skin. His flesh is very pale in the sunlight and he no longer looks strong and stocky. I have to dig the stingers out of his tracker jacker lumps, which causes him to wince, but the minute I apply the leaves he sighs in relief. While he dries in the sun, I wash his filthy shirt and jacket and spread them over boulders. Then I apply the burn cream to his chest. This is when I notice how hot his skin is becoming. The layer of mud and the bottles of water have disguised the fact that hes burning with fever. I dig through the first-aid kit I got from the boy from District 1 and find pills that reduce your temperature. My mother actually breaks down and buys these on occasion when her home remedies fail. Swallow these, I tell him, and he obediently takes the medicine. You must be hungry. Not really. Its funny, I havent been hungry for days, says Peeta. In fact, when I offer him groosling, he wrinkles his nose at it and turns away. Thats when I know how sick he is. Peeta, we need to get some food in you, I insist. Itll just come right back up, he says. The best I

can do is to get him to eat a few bits of dried apple. Thanks. Im much better, really. Can I sleep now,

Katniss? he asks. Soon, I promise. I need to look at your leg first. Trying to be as gentle as I can, I remove his boots, his socks, and then very slowly inch his pants off of him. I can see the tear Catos sword made in the fabric over his thigh, but it in no way prepares me for what lies underneath. The deep inflamed gash oozing both blood and pus. The swelling of the leg. And worst of all, the smell of festering flesh. I want to run away. Disappear into the woods like I did that day they brought the burn victim to our house. Go and hunt while my mother and Prim attend to what I have neither the skill nor the courage to face. But theres no one here but me. I try to capture the calm demeanor my mother assumes when handling particularly bad cases. Pretty awful, huh? says Peeta. Hes watching me closely. So-so. I shrug like its no big deal. You should see some of the people they bring my mother from the mines. I refrain from saying how I usually clear out of the house whenever shes treating anything worse than a cold. Come to think of it, I dont even much like to be around coughing.

First thing is to clean it well. Ive left on Peetas undershorts because theyre not in bad shape and I dont want to pull them over the swollen thigh and, all right, maybe the idea of him being naked makes me uncomfortable. Thats another thing about my mother and Prim. Nakedness has no effect on them, gives them no cause for embarrassment. Ironically, at this point in the Games, my little sister would be of far more use to Peeta than I am. I scoot my square of plastic under him so I can wash down the rest of him. With each bottle I pour over him, the worse the wound looks. The rest of his lower body has fared pretty well, just one tracker jacker sting and a few small burns that I treat quickly. But the gash on his leg . . . What on earth can I do for that? Why dont we give it some air and then . . . I trail off. And then youll patch it up? says Peeta. He looks almost sorry for me, as if he knows how lost I am. Thats right, I say. In the meantime, you eat these. I put a few dried pear halves in his hand and go back in the stream to wash the rest of his clothes. When theyre flattened out and drying, I examine the contents of the first-aid kit. Its pretty basic stuff. Bandages, fever pills, medicine to calm stomachs. Nothing of the caliber Ill need to treat Peeta. Were going to have to experiment some, I admit. I know the tracker jacker leaves

draw out infection, so I start with those. Within minutes of pressing the handful of chewed-up green stuff into the wound, pus begins running down the side of his leg. I tell myself this is a good thing and bite the inside of my cheek hard because my breakfast is threatening to make a reappearance. Katniss? Peeta says. I meet his eyes, knowing my face must be some shade of green. He mouths the words. How about that kiss? I burst out laughing because the whole thing is so revolting I cant stand it. Something wrong? he asks a little too

innocently. I . . . Im no good at this. Im not my mother. Ive no idea what Im doing and I hate pus, I say. Euh! I allow myself to let out a groan as I rinse away the first round of leaves and apply the second. Euuuh! How do you hunt? he asks. Trust me. Killing things is much easier than this, I say. Although for all I know, I am killing you. Can you speed it up a little? he asks. No. Shut up and eat your pears, I say. After three applications and what seems like a bucket of pus, the wound does look better. Now that the swelling has gone down, I can see how deep Catos sword cut. Right down to the bone. What next, Dr. Everdeen? he asks. Maybe Ill put some of the burn

ointment on it. I think it helps with infection anyway. And wrap it up? I say. I do and the whole thing seems a lot more manageable, covered in clean white cotton. Although, against the sterile bandage, the hem of his undershorts looks filthy and teeming with contagion. I pull out Rues backpack. Here, cover yourself with this and Ill wash your shorts. Oh, I dont care if you see me, says Peeta. Youre just like the rest of my family, I say. I care, all right? I turn my back and look at the stream until the undershorts splash into the current. He must be feeling a bit better if he can throw. You know, youre kind of squeamish for such a lethal person, says Peeta as I beat the shorts clean between two rocks. I wish Id let you give Haymitch a shower after all. I wrinkle my nose at the memory. Whats he sent you so far? Not a thing, says Peeta. Then theres a pause as it hits him. Why, did you get something? Burn medicine, I say almost sheepishly. Oh, and some bread. I always knew you were his favorite, says Peeta. Please, he cant stand being in the same room with me, I say. Because youre just alike, mutters Peeta. I ignore it though because this really isnt the time for me to be insulting Haymitch, which is my first impulse. I let Peeta doze off while his clothes dry out, but by late afternoon, I dont dare wait any longer. I gently shake his

shoulder. Peeta, weve got to go now. Go? He seems confused. Go where? Away from here. Downstream maybe. Somewhere we can hide you until youre stronger, I say. I help him dress, leaving his feet bare so we can walk in the water, and pull him upright. His face drains of color the moment he puts weight on his leg. Come on. You can do this. But he cant. Not for long anyway. We make it about fifty yards downstream, with him propped up by my shoulder, and I can tell hes going to black out. I sit him on the bank, push his head between his knees, and pat his back awkwardly as I survey the area. Of course, Id love to get him up in a tree, but thats not going to happen. It could be worse though. Some of the rocks form small cavelike structures. I set my sights on one about twenty yards above the stream. When Peetas able to stand, I half-guide, half-carry him up to the cave. Really, Id like to look around for a better place, but this one will have to do because my

ally is shot. Paper white, panting, and, even though its only just cooling off, hes shivering. I cover the floor of the cave with a layer of pine needles, unroll my sleeping bag, and tuck him into it. I get a couple of pills and some water into him

when hes not noticing, but he refuses to eat even the fruit. Then he just lies there, his eyes trained on my face as I build a sort of blind out of vines to conceal the mouth of the cave. The result is unsatisfactory. An animal might not question it, but a human would see hands had manufactured it quickly enough. I tear it down in frustration. Katniss, he says. I go over to him and brush the hair back from his eyes. Thanks for finding me. You would have found me if you could, I say. His foreheads burning up. Like the medicines having no effect at all. Suddenly, out of nowhere, Im scared hes going to die. Yes. Look, if I dont make it back he begins. Dont talk like that. I didnt drain all that pus for nothing, I say. I know. But just in case I dont he tries to continue. No, Peeta, I dont even want to discuss it, I say, placing my fingers on his lips to quiet him. But I he insists. Impulsively, I lean forward and kiss him, stopping his words. This is probably overdue anyway since hes right, we are supposed to be madly in love. Its the first time Ive ever kissed a boy, which should make some sort of impression I guess, but all I can register is how unnaturally hot his lips are from the fever. I break away and pull the edge of the sleeping bag up around him. Youre not going to die. I forbid it. All right? All right, he whispers. I step out in the cool

evening air just as the parachute floats down from the sky. My fingers quickly undo the tie, hoping for some real medicine to treat Peetas leg. Instead I find a pot of hot broth. Haymitch couldnt be sending me a clearer message. One kiss equals one pot of broth. I can almost hear his snarl. Youre supposed to be in love, sweetheart. The boys dying. Give me something I can work with! And hes right. If I want to keep Peeta alive, Ive got to give the audience something more to care about. Star-crossed lovers desperate to get home together. Two hearts beating as one. Romance. Never having been in love, this is going to be a real trick. I think of my parents. The way my father never failed to bring her gifts from the woods. The way my mothers face would light up at the sound of his boots at the door. The way she almost stopped living when he died. Peeta! I say, trying for the special tone that my mother used only with my father. Hes dozed off again, but I kiss him awake, which seems to startle him. Then he smiles as if hed be happy to lie there gazing at me forever. Hes great at this stuff. I hold up the pot. Peeta, look what Haymitch has sent you.

20.

Getting the broth into Peeta takes an hour of coaxing, begging, threatening, and yes, kissing, but finally, sip by sip, he empties the pot. I let him drift off to sleep then and attend to my own needs, wolfing down a supper of

groosling and roots while I watch the daily report in the sky. No new casualties. Still, Peeta and I have given the audience a fairly interesting day. Hopefully, the Gamemakers will allow us a peaceful night. I automatically look around for a good tree to nest in before I realize thats over. At least for a while. I cant very well leave Peeta unguarded on the ground. I left the scene of his last hiding place on the bank of the stream untouched how could I conceal it? and were a scant fifty yards downstream. I put on my glasses, place my weapons in readiness, and settle down to keep watch. The temperature drops rapidly and soon Im chilled to the bone. Eventually, I give in and slide into the sleeping bag with Peeta. Its toasty warm and I snuggle down gratefully until I realize its more than warm, its overly hot because the bag is reflecting back his fever. I check his forehead and find it burning and dry. I dont know what to do. Leave him in the bag and hope the excessive heat breaks the

fever? Take him out and hope the night air cools him off? I end up just dampening a strip of bandage and placing it on his forehead. It seems weak, but Im afraid to do anything too drastic. I spend the night half-sitting, half-lying next to Peeta, refreshing the bandage, and trying not to dwell on the fact that by teaming up with him, Ive made myself far more vulnerable than when I was alone. Tethered to the ground, on guard, with a very sick person to take care of. But I knew he was injured. And still I came after him. Im just going to have to trust that whatever instinct sent me to find him was a good one. When the sky turns rosy, I notice the sheen of sweat on Peetas lip and discover the fever has broken. Hes not back to normal, but its come down a few degrees. Last night, when I was gathering vines, I came upon a bush of Rues berries. I strip off the fruit and mash it up in the broth pot with cold water. Peetas struggling to get up when I reach the cave. I woke up and you were gone, he says. I was worried about you. I have to laugh as I ease him back down. You were worried about me? Have you taken a look at yourself lately? I thought Cato and Clove might have found you. They like to hunt at night, he says, still serious. Clove? Which one is that? I ask. The girl from District Two. Shes still alive, right? he

says. Yes, theres just them and us and Thresh and Foxface, I say. Thats what I nicknamed the girl from Five. How do you feel? Better than yesterday. This is an enormous improvement over the mud, he says. Clean clothes and medicine and a sleeping bag . . . And you. Oh, right, the whole romance thing. I reach out to touch his cheek and he catches my hand and presses it against his lips. I remember my father doing this very thing to my mother and I wonder where Peeta picked it up. Surely not from his father and the witch. No more kisses for you until youve eaten, I say. We get him propped up against the wall and he obediently swallows the spoonfuls of the

berry mush I feed him. He refuses the groosling again, though. You didnt sleep, Peeta says. Im all right, I say. But the truth is, Im exhausted. Sleep now. Ill keep watch. Ill wake you if anything happens, he says. I hesitate. Katniss, you cant stay up forever. Hes got a point there. Ill have to sleep eventually. And probably better to do it now when he seems relatively alert and we have daylight on our side. All right, I say. But just for a few hours. Then you wake me. Its too warm for the sleeping bag now. I smooth it out on the cave floor and lie down, one hand on my loaded bow in

case I have to shoot at a moments notice. Peeta sits beside me, leaning against the wall, his bad leg stretched out before him, his eyes trained on the world outside. Go to sleep, he says softly. His hand brushes the loose strands of my hair off my forehead. Unlike the staged kisses and caresses so far, this gesture seems natural and comforting. I dont want him to stop and he doesnt. Hes still stroking my hair when I fall asleep. Too long. I sleep too long. I know from the moment I open my eyes that were into the afternoon. Peetas right beside me, his position unchanged. I sit up, feeling somehow defensive but better rested than Ive been in days. Peeta, you were supposed to wake me after a couple of hours, I say. For what? Nothings going on here, he says. Besides I like watching you sleep. You dont scowl. Improves your looks a lot. This, of course, brings on a scowl that makes him grin. Thats when I notice how dry his lips are. I test his cheek. Hot as a coal stove. He claims hes been drinking, but the containers still feel full to me. I give him more fever pills and stand over him while he drinks first one, then a second quart of water. Then I tend to his minor wounds, the burns, the stings, which are showing improvement. I steel myself and unwrap the leg. My heart drops into my stomach. Its worse, much worse. Theres no

more pus in evidence, but the swelling has increased and the tight shiny skin is inflamed. Then I see the red streaks starting to crawl up his leg. Blood poisoning. Unchecked, it will kill him for sure. My chewed-up leaves and ointment wont make a dent in it. Well need strong anti-infection drugs from the Capitol. I cant imagine the cost of such potent medicine. If Haymitch pooled every donation from every sponsor, would he have enough? I doubt it. Gifts go up in price the longer the Games continue. What buys a full meal on day one buys a cracker on day twelve. And the kind of medicine Peeta needs would have been at a premium from the beginning. Well, theres more swelling, but the pus is gone, I say in an unsteady voice. I know what blood poisoning is, Katniss, says Peeta. Even if my mother isnt a healer. Youre just going to have to outlast the others, Peeta. Theyll cure it back at the Capitol when we win, I say. Yes, thats a good plan, he says. But I feel this is mostly for my benefit. You have to eat. Keep your strength up. Im going to make you

soup, I say. Dont light a fire, he says. Its not worth it. Well see, I say. As I take the pot down to the stream, Im struck by how brutally hot it is. I swear the

Gamemakers are progressively ratcheting up the temperature in the daytime and sending it plummeting at night. The heat of the sun-baked stones by the stream gives me an idea though. Maybe I wont need to light a fire. I settle down on a big flat rock halfway between the stream and the cave. After purifying half a pot of water, I place it in direct sunlight and add several egg-size hot stones to the water. Im the first to admit Im not much of a cook. But since soup mainly involves tossing everything in a pot and waiting, its one of my better dishes. I mince groosling until its practically mush and mash some of Rues roots. Fortunately, theyve both been roasted already so they mostly need to be heated up. Already, between the sunlight and the rocks, the waters warm. I put in the meat and roots, swap in fresh rocks, and go find something green to spice it up a little. Before long, I discover a tuft of chives growing at the base of some rocks. Perfect. I chop them very fine and add them to the pot, switch out the rocks again, put on the lid, and let the whole thing stew. Ive seen very few signs of game around, but I dont feel comfortable leaving Peeta alone while I hunt, so I rig half a dozen snares and hope I get lucky. I wonder about the other tributes, how theyre managing now that their main source of food has been blown up.

At least three of them, Cato, Clove, and Foxface, had been relying on it. Probably not Thresh though. Ive got a feeling he must share some of Rues knowledge on how to feed yourself from the earth. Are they fighting each other? Looking for us? Maybe one of them has located us and is just waiting for the right moment to attack. The idea sends me back to the cave. Peetas stretched out on top of the sleeping bag in the shade of the rocks. Although he brightens a bit when I come in, its clear he feels miserable. I put cool cloths on his head, but they warm up almost as soon as they touch his skin. Do you want anything? I ask. No, he says. Thank you. Wait, yes. Tell me a story. A story? What about? I say. Im not much for storytelling. Its kind of like singing. But once in a while, Prim wheedles one out of me. Something happy. Tell me about the happiest day you can remember, says Peeta. Something between a sigh and a huff of exasperation leaves my mouth. A happy story? This will require a lot more effort than the soup. I rack my brains for good memories. Most of them involve Gale and me out hunting and somehow I dont think these will play well with either Peeta or the audience. That leaves Prim. Did I ever tell you about how I got Prims goat? I ask. Peeta shakes his head, and looks at me expectantly. So I begin. But carefully.

Because my words are going out all over Panem. And while people have no doubt put two and two together that I hunt illegally, I dont want to hurt Gale

or Greasy Sae or the butcher or even the Peacekeepers back home who are my customers by publicly announcing theyd breaking the law, too. Heres the real story of how I got the money for Prims goat, Lady. It was a Friday evening, the day before Prims tenth birthday in late May. As soon as school ended, Gale and I hit the woods, because I wanted to get enough to trade for a present for Prim. Maybe some new cloth for a dress or a hairbrush. Our snares had done well enough and the woods were flush with greens, but this was really no more than our average Friday-night haul. I was disappointed as we headed back, even though Gale said wed be sure to do better tomorrow. We were resting a moment by a stream when we saw him. A young buck, probably a yearling by his size. His antlers were just growing in, still small and coated in velvet. Poised to run but unsure of us, unfamiliar with humans. Beautiful. Less beautiful perhaps when the two arrows caught him, one in the neck, the other in the chest. Gale and I had shot at the same time. The buck tried to run but stumbled, and

Gales knife slit his throat before he knew what had happened. Momentarily, Id felt a pang at killing something so fresh and innocent. And then my stomach rumbled at the thought of all that fresh and innocent meat. A deer! Gale and I have only brought down three in all. The first one, a doe that had injured her leg somehow, almost didnt count. But we knew from that experience not to go dragging the carcass into the Hob. It had caused chaos with people bidding on parts and actually trying to hack off pieces themselves. Greasy Sae had intervened and sent us with our deer to the butcher, but not before itd been badly damaged, hunks of meat taken, the hide riddled with holes. Although everybody paid up fairly, it had lowered the value of the kill. This time, we waited until dark fell and slipped under a hole in the fence close to the butcher. Even though we were known hunters, it wouldnt have been good to go carrying a 150-pound deer through the streets of District 12 in daylight like we were rubbing it in the officials faces. The butcher, a short, chunky woman named Rooba, came to the back door when we knocked. You dont haggle with Rooba. She gives you one price, which you can take or leave, but its a fair price. We took her offer on the deer and she threw in a couple of venison steaks we could pick up after the

butchering. Even with the money divided in two, neither Gale nor I had held so much at one time in our lives. We decided to keep it a secret and surprise our families with the meat and money at the end of the next day. This is where I really got the money for the goat, but I tell Peeta I sold an old silver locket of my mothers. That cant hurt anyone. Then I pick up the story in the late afternoon of Prims birthday. Gale and I went to the market on the square so that I could buy dress materials. As I was running my fingers over a length of thick blue cotton cloth, something caught my

eye. Theres an old man who keeps a small herd of goats on the other side of the Seam. I dont know his real name, everyone just calls him the Goat Man. His joints are swollen and twisted in painful angles, and hes got a hacking cough that proves he spent years in the mines. But hes lucky. Somewhere along the way he saved up enough for these goats and now has something to do in his old age besides slowly starve to death. Hes filthy and impatient, but the goats are clean and their milk is rich if you can afford it. One of the goats, a white one with black patches, was lying down in a cart. It was easy to see why. Something, probably a dog, had mauled her

shoulder and infection had set in. It was bad, the Goat Man had to hold her up to milk her. But I thought I knew someone who could fix it. Gale, I whispered. I want that goat for Prim. Owning a nanny goat can change your life in District 12. The animals can live off almost anything, the Meadows a perfect feeding place, and they can give four quarts of milk a day. To drink, to make into cheese, to sell. Its not even against the law. Shes hurt pretty bad, said Gale. We better take a closer look. We went over and bought a cup of milk to share, then stood over the goat as if idly curious. Let her be, said the man. Just looking, said Gale. Well, look fast. She goes to the butcher soon. Hardly anyone will buy her milk, and then they only pay half price, said the man. Whats the butcher giving for her? I asked. The man shrugged. Hang around and see. I turned and saw Rooba coming across the square toward us. Lucky thing you showed up, said the Goat Man when she arrived. Girls got her eye on your goat. Not if shes spoken for, I said carelessly. Rooba looked me up and down then frowned at the goat. Shes not. Look at that shoulder. Bet you half the carcass will be too rotten for even sausage. What? said the Goat Man. We had a deal. We had a deal on an animal with a few teeth marks. Not that thing. Sell her to the girl if shes stupid enough to take

her, said Rooba. As she marched off, I caught her wink. The Goat Man was mad, but he still wanted that goal off his hands. It took us half an hour to agree on the price. Quite a crowd had gathered by then to hand out opinions. It was an excellent deal if the goat lived; Id been robbed if she died. People took sides in the argument, but I took the goat. Gale offered to carry her. I think he wanted to see the look on Prims face as much as I did. In a moment of complete giddiness, I bought a pink ribbon and tied it around her neck. Then we hurried back to my house. You should have seen Prims reaction when we walked in with that goat. Remember this is a girl who wept to save that awful old cat, Buttercup. She was so excited she started crying and laughing all at once. My mother was less sure, seeing the injury, but the pair of them went to work on it, grinding up herbs and coaxing brews down the animals throat. They sound like you, says Peeta. I had almost forgotten he

was there. Oh, no, Peeta. They work magic. That thing couldnt have died if it tried, I say. But then I bite my tongue, realizing what that must sound like to Peeta, who is dying, in my incompetent hands. Dont worry. Im not trying, he jokes. Finish

the story. Well, thats it. Only I remember that night, Prim insisted on sleeping with Lady on a blanket next to the fire. And just before they drifted off, the goat licked her cheek, like it was giving her a good night kiss or something, I say. It was already mad about her. Was it still wearing the pink ribbon? he asks. I think so, I say. Why? Im just trying to get a picture, he says thoughtfully. I can see why that day made you happy. Well, I knew that goat would be a little gold mine, 1 say. Yes, of course I was referring to that, not the lasting joy you gave the sister you love so much you took her place in the reaping, says Peeta drily. The goat has paid for itself. Several times over, I say in a superior tone. Well, it wouldnt dare do anything else after you saved its life, says Peeta. I intend to do the same thing. Really? What did you cost me again? I ask. A lot of trouble. Dont worry. Youll get it all back, he says. Youre not making sense, I say. I test his forehead. The levers going nowhere but up. Youre a little cooler though. The sound of the trumpets startles me. Im on my feet and at the mouth of the cave in a flash, not wanting to miss a syllable. Its my new best friend, Claudius Templesmith, and as I expected, hes inviting us to a feast. Well, were not that hungry and I actually wave his offer away in indifference when he says, Now

hold on. Some of you may already be declining my invitation. But this is no ordinary feast. Each of you needs something desperately. I do need something desperately. Something to heal Peetas leg. Each of you will find that something in a backpack, marked with your district number, at the Cornucopia at dawn. Think hard about refusing to show up. For some of you, this will be your last chance, says Claudius. Theres nothing else, just his words hanging in the air. I jump as Peeta grips my shoulder from behind. No, he says. Youre not risking your life for me. Who said I was? I say. So, youre not going? he asks. Of course, Im not going. Give me some credit. Do you think Im running straight into some free-for-all against Cato and Clove and Thresh? Dont be stupid, I say, helping him back to bed. Ill let them fight it out, well see whos in the sky tomorrow night and work out a plan from there. Youre such a bad liar, Katniss. I dont know how youve survived this long. He begins to mimic me. I knew that goat would be a little gold mine. Youre a little cooler though. Of course, Im not going. He shakes his head. Never gamble at cards. Youll lose your last coin, he says. Anger flushes my face. All right, I am going, and you cant stop me! I can follow you. At least partway. I may not make it to the Cornucopia, but if Im yelling your

name, I bet someone can find me. And then

Ill be dead for sure, he says. You wont get a hundred yards from here on that leg, I say. Then Ill drag myself, says Peeta. You go and Im going, too. Hes just stubborn enough and maybe just strong enough to do it. Come howling after me in the woods. Even if a tribute doesnt find him, something else might. He cant defend himself. Id probably have to wall him up in the cave just to go myself. And who knows what the exertion will do to him? What am I supposed to do? Sit here and watch you die? I say. He must know thats not an option. That the audience would hate me. And frankly, I would hate myself, too, if I didnt even try. I wont die. I promise. If you promise not to go, he says. Were at something of a stalemate. I know I cant argue him out of this one, so I dont try. I pretend, reluctantly, to go along. Then you have to do what I say. Drink your water, wake me when I tell you, and eat every bite of the soup no matter how disgusting it is! I snap at him. Agreed. Is it ready? he asks. Wait here, I say. The airs gone cold even though the suns still up. Im right about the Gamemakers messing with the temperature. I wonder if the thing

someone needs desperately is a good blanket. The soup is still nice and warm in its iron pot. And actually doesnt taste too bad. Peeta eats without complaint, even scraping out the pot to show his enthusiasm. He rambles on about how delicious it is, which should be encouraging if you dont know what fever does to people. Hes like listening to Haymitch before the alcohol has soaked him into incoherence. I give him another dose of fever medicine before he goes off his head completely. As I go down to the stream to wash up, all I can think is that hes going to die if I dont get to that feast. Ill keep him going for a day or two, and then the infection will reach his heart or his brain or his lungs and hell be gone. And Ill be here all alone. Again. Waiting for the others. Im so lost in thought that I almost miss the parachute, even though it floats right by me. Then I spring after it, yanking it from the water, tearing off the silver fabric to retrieve the vial. Haymitch has done it! Hes gotten the medicine I dont know how, persuaded some gaggle of romantic fools to sell their jewels and I can save Peeta! Its such a tiny vial though. It must be very strong to cure someone as ill as Peeta. A ripple of doubt runs through me. I uncork the vial and take a deep sniff. My spirits fall at the sickly sweet scent. Just to be sure, I place a drop on the tip of my

tongue. Theres no question, its sleep syrup. Its a common medicine in District 12. Cheap, as medicine goes, but very addictive. Almost everyones had a dose at one time or another. We have some in a bottle at home. My mother gives it to hysterical patients to knock them out to stitch up a bad wound or quiet their minds or just to help someone in pain get through the night. It only takes a little. A vial this size could knock Peeta out for a full day, but what good is that? Im

so furious Im about to throw Haymitchs last offering into the stream when it hits me. A full day? Thats more than I need. I mash up a handful of berries so the taste wont be as noticeable and add some mint leaves for good measure. Then I head back up to the cave. Ive brought you a treat. I found a new patch of berries a little farther downstream. Peeta opens his mouth for the first bite without hesitation. He swallows then frowns slightly. Theyre very sweet. Yes, theyre sugar berries. My mother makes jam from them. Havent you ever had them before? I say, poking the next spoonful in his mouth. No, he says, almost puzzled. But they taste familiar. Sugar berries? Well, you cant get them in the market much, they only grow wild, I say. Another mouthful

goes down. Just one more to go. Theyre sweet as syrup, he says, taking the last spoonful. Syrup. His eyes widen as he realizes the truth. I clamp my hand over his mouth and nose hard, forcing him to swallow instead of spit. He tries to make himself vomit the stuff up, but its too late, hes already losing consciousness. Even as he fades away, I can see in his eyes what Ive done is unforgivable. I sit back on my heels and look at him with a mixture of sadness and satisfaction. A stray berry stains his chin and I wipe it away. Who cant lie, Peeta? I say, even though he cant hear me. It doesnt matter. The rest of Panem can.

21.

In the remaining hours before nightfall, I gather rocks and do my best to camouflage the opening of the cave. Its a slow and arduous process, but after a lot of sweating and shifting things around, Im pretty pleased with my work, The cave now appears to be part of a larger pile of rocks, like so many in the vicinity. I can still crawl in to Peeta through a small opening, but its undetectable from the out side.

Thats good, because Ill need to share that sleeping bag again tonight. Also, if I dont make it back from the feast, Peeta will be hidden but not entirely imprisoned. Although I doubt he can hang on much longer without medicine. If I die at the feast, District 12 isnt likely to have a victor. I make a meal out of the smaller, bonier fish that inhabit the stream down here, fill every water container and purify it, and clean my weapons. Ive nine arrows left in all. I debate leaving the knife with Peeta so hell have some protection while Im gone, but theres really no point. He was right about camouflage being his final defense. But I still might have use for the knife. Who knows what Ill encounter? Here are some things Im fairly certain of. That at least Cato, Clove, and Thresh will be on hand when the feast starts. Im not sure about Foxface since direct confrontation isnt her style or her forte. Shes even smaller than I am and unarmed, unless shes picked up some weapons recently. Shell probably be hanging somewhere nearby, seeing what she can scavenge. But the other three . . . Im going to have my hands full. My ability to kill at a distance is my greatest asset, but I know Ill have to go


right into the thick of things to get that backpack, the one with the number 12 on it that Claudius Templesmith mentioned. I watch the sky, hoping for one less opponent at dawn, but nobody appears tonight. Tomorrow there will be faces up there. Feasts always result in fatalities. I crawl into the cave, secure my glasses, and curl up next to Peeta. Luckily I had that good long sleep today. I have to stay awake. I dont really think anyone will attack our cave tonight, but I cant risk missing the dawn. So cold, so bitterly cold tonight. As if the Gamemakers have sent an infusion of frozen air across the arena, which may be exactly what theyve done. I lay next to Peeta in the bag, trying to absorb every bit of his fever heat. Its strange to be so physically close to someone whos so distant. Peeta might as well be back in the Capitol, or in District 12, or on the moon right now, hed be no harder to reach. Ive never felt lonelier since the Games began. Just accept it will be a bad night, I tell myself. I try not to, but I cant help thinking of my mother and Prim, wondering if theyll sleep a wink tonight. At this late stage in the Games, with an important event like the feast, school will probably be canceled. My family can either watch on that static-filled old clunker of a television at home or join the crowds in the square to

watch on the big, clear screens, Theyll have privacy at home but support in the square. People will give them a kind word, a bit of food if they can spare it. I wonder if the baker has sought them out, especially now that Peeta and I are a team, and made good on his promise to keep my sisters belly full. Spirits must be running high in District 12. We so rarely have anyone to root for at this point in the Games. Surely, people are excited about Peeta and me, especially now that were together. If I close my eyes, I can imagine their shouts at the screens, urging us on. I see their faces Greasy Sac and Madge and even the Peacekeepers who buy my meat cheering for us. And Gale. I know him. He wont be shouting and cheering. But hell be watching, every moment, every twist and turn, and willing me to come home. I wonder if hes hoping that Peeta makes it as well. Gales not my boyfriend, but would he be, if I opened that door? He talked about us running away together. Was that just a practical calculation of our chances of survival away from the district? Or something more? I wonder what he makes of all this kissing. Through a crack in the rocks, I watch the moon cross the sky. At what I judge to be about three hours before dawn, I begin final preparations. Im careful to leave Peeta with water and the medical kit right beside him. Nothing

else will be of much use if I dont return, and even these would only prolong his life a short time. After some debate, I strip him of his jacket and zip it on over my own. He doesnt need it. Not now in the sleeping bag with his fever, and during the day, if Im not there to remove it, hell be roasting in

it. My hands are already stiff from cold, so I take Rues spare pair of socks, cut holes for my fingers and thumbs, and pull them on. It helps anyway. I fill her small pack with some food, a water bottle, and bandages, tuck the knife in my belt, get my bow and arrows. Im about to leave when I remember the importance of sustaining the star-crossed lover routine and I lean over and give Peeta a long, lingering kiss. I imagine the teary sighs emanating from the Capitol and pretend to brush away a tear of my own. Then I squeeze through the opening in the rocks out into the night. My breath makes small white clouds as it hits the air. Its as cold as a November night at home. One where Ive slipped into the woods, lantern in hand, to join Gale at some prearranged place where well sit bundled together, sipping herb tea from metal flasks wrapped in quilting, hoping game will pass our way as the morning comes on. Oh,

Gale, I think. If only you had my back now . . . I move as fast as I dare. The glasses are quite remarkable, but I still sorely miss having the use of my left ear. I dont know what the explosion did, but it damaged something deep and irreparable. Never mind. If I get home, Ill be so stinking rich, Ill be able to pay someone to do my hearing. The woods always look different at night. Even with the glasses, everything has an unfamiliar slant to it. As if the daytime trees and flowers and stones had gone to bed and sent slightly more ominous versions of themselves to take their places. I dont try anything tricky, like taking a new route. I make my way back up the stream and follow the same path back to Rues hiding place near the lake. Along the way, I see no sign of another tribute, not a puff of breath, not a quiver of a branch. Either Im the first to arrive or the others positioned themselves last night. Theres still more than an hour, maybe two, when I wriggle into the underbrush and wait for the blood to begin to flow. I chew a few mint leaves, my stomach isnt up for much more. Thank goodness, I have Peetas jacket as well as my own. If not, Id be forced to move around to stay warm. The sky turns a misty morning gray and still theres no sign of the other tributes. Its not surprising really. Everyone has distinguished themselves either by

strength or deadliness or cunning. Do they suppose, I wonder, that I have Peeta with me? I doubt Foxface and Thresh even know he was wounded. All the better if they think hes covering me when I go in for the backpack. But where is it? The arena has lightened enough for me to remove my glasses. I can hear the morning birds singing. Isnt it time? For a second, Im panicked that Im at the wrong location. But no, Im certain I remember Claudius Templesmith specifying the Cornucopia. And there it is. And here I am. So wheres my feast? Just as the first ray of sun glints off the gold Cornucopia, theres a disturbance on the plain. The ground before the mouth of the horn splits in two and a round table with a snowy white

cloth rises into the arena. On the table sit four backpacks, two large black ones with the numbers 2 and 11, a medium-size green one with the number 5, and a tiny orange one really I could carry it around my wrist that must be marked with a 12. The table has just clicked into place when a figure darts out of the Cornucopia, snags the green backpack, and speeds off. Foxface! Leave it to her to come up with such a clever and risky idea! The rest of us are still poised around the plain, sizing up the

situation, and shes got hers. Shes got us trapped, too, because no one wants to chase her down, not while their own pack sits so vulnerable on the table. Foxface must have purposefully left the other packs alone, knowing that to steal one without her number would definitely bring on a pursuer. That should have been my strategy! By the lime Ive worked through the emotions of surprise, admiration, anger, jealousy, and frustration, Im watching that reddish mane of hair disappear into the trees well out of shooting range. Huh. Im always dreading the others, but maybe Foxface is the real opponent here. Shes cost me time, too, because by now its clear that I must get to the table next. Anyone who beats me to it will easily scoop up my pack and be gone. Without hesitation, I sprint for the table. I can sense the emergence of danger before I see it. Fortunately, the first knife comes whizzing in on my right side so I can hear it and Im able to deflect it with my bow. I turn, drawing back the bowstring and send an arrow straight at Cloves heart. She turns just enough to avoid a fatal hit, but the point punctures her upper left arm. Unfortunately, she throws with her right, but its enough to slow her down a few moments, having to pull the arrow from her arm, take in the severity of the wound. I keep moving, positioning

the next arrow automatically, as only someone who has hunted for years can do. Im at the table now, my fingers closing over the tiny orange backpack. My hand slips between the straps and I yank it up on my arm, its really too small to fit on any other part of my anatomy, and Im turning to fire again when the second knife catches me in the forehead. It slices above my right eyebrow, opening a gash that sends a gush running down my face, blinding my eye, filling my mouth with the sharp, metallic taste of my own blood. I stagger backward but still manage to send my readied arrow in the general direction of my assailant. I know as it leaves my hands it will miss. And then Clove slams into me, knocking me flat on my back, pinning my shoulders to the ground, with her knees. This is it, I think, and hope for Prims sake it will be fast. But Clove means to savor the moment. Even feels she has time. No doubt Cato is somewhere nearby, guarding her, waiting for Thresh and possibly Peeta. Wheres your boyfriend, District Twelve? Still hanging on? she asks. Well, as long as were talking Im alive. Hes out there now. Hunting Cato, I snarl at her. Then I scream at

the top of my lungs. Peeta! Clove jams her fist into my windpipe, very

effectively cutting off my voice. But her heads whipping from side to side, and I know for a moment shes at least considering Im telling the truth. Since no Peeta appears to save me, she turns back to me. Liar, she says with a grin. Hes nearly dead. Cato knows where he cut him. Youve probably got him strapped up in some tree while you try to keep his heart going. Whats in the pretty little backpack? That medicine for Lover Boy? Too bad hell never get it. Clove opens her jacket. Its lined with an impressive array of knives. She carefully selects an almost dainty-looking number with a cruel, curved blade. I promised Cato if he let me have you, Id give the audience a good show. Im struggling now in an effort to unseat her, but its no use. Shes too heavy and her lock on me too tight. Forget it, District Twelve. Were going to kill you. Just like we did your pathetic little ally . . . What was her name? The one who hopped around in the trees? Rue? Well, first Rue, then you, and then I think well just let nature take care of Lover Boy. How does that sound? Clove asks. Now, where to start? She carelessly wipes away the blood from my wound with her jacket sleeve. For a moment, she surveys my face, tilting it from side to side as if its a block of wood and shes deciding exactly what pattern to carve on it. I attempt to bite her hand, but she

grabs the hair on the top of my head, forcing me back to the ground. I think . . . She almost purrs. I think well start with your mouth. I clamp my teeth together as she teasingly traces the outline of my lips with the tip of the blade. I wont close my eyes. The comment about Rue has filled me with fury, enough fury I think to die with some dignity. As my last act of defiance, I will stare her down as long as I can see, which will probably not be an extended period of time, but I will stare her down, I will not cry out. I will die, in my own small way, undefeated. Yes, I dont think youll have much use for your lips anymore. Want to blow Lover Boy one last kiss? she asks, I work up a mouthful of blood and saliva and spit it in her face. She flushes with rage. All right then. Lets get started. I brace myself for the agony thats sure to follow. But as I feel the tip open the first cut at my lip, some great form yanks Clove from my body and then shes screaming. Im too stunned at first, too unable to process what has happened. Has Peeta somehow come to my rescue? Have the Gamemakers sent in some wild animal to add to the fun? Has a hovercraft inexplicably plucked her into the air? But when I push myself up on my numb arms, I see its none of the above. Clove is dangling a foot off the ground, imprisoned in Threshs arms. I let out a gasp,

seeing him like that, towering over me, holding Clove like a rag doll. I remember him as big, but he seems more massive, more powerful than I even recall. If anything, he seems to have gained weight in the arena. He flips

Clove around and flings her onto the ground. When he shouts, I jump, never having heard him speak above a mutter. Whatd you do to that little girl? You kill her? Clove is scrambling backward on all fours, like a frantic insect, too shocked to even call for Cato. No! No, it wasnt me! You said her name. I heard you. You kill her? Another thought brings a fresh wave of rage to his features. You cut her up like you were going to cut up this girl here? No! No, I Clove sees the stone, about the size of a small loaf of bread in Threshs hand and loses it. Cato! she screeches. Cato! Clove! I hear Catos answer, but hes too far away, I can tell that much, to do her any good. What was he doing? Trying to get Foxface or Peeta? Or had he been lying in wait for Thresh and just badly misjudged his location? Thresh brings the rock down hard against Cloves temple. Its not bleeding, but I can see the dent in her skull and I know that shes a goner. Theres still life in her now though, in the rapid rise and fall of her

chest, the low moan escaping her lips. When Thresh whirls around on me, the rock raised, I know its no good to run. And my bow is empty, the last loaded arrow having gone in Cloves direction. Im trapped in the glare of his strange golden brown eyes. Whatd she mean? About Rue being your ally? I I we teamed up. Blew up the supplies. I tried to save her, I did. But he got there first. District One, I say. Maybe if he knows I helped Rue, he wont choose some slow, sadistic end for me. And you killed him? he demands. Yes. I killed him. And buried her in flowers, I say. And I sang her to sleep. Tears spring in my eyes. The tension, the fight goes out of me at the memory. And Im overwhelmed by Rue, and the pain in my head, and my fear of Thresh, and the moaning of the dying girl a few feet away. To sleep? Thresh says gruffly. To death. I sang until she died, I say. Your district. . . They sent me bread. My hand reaches up but not for an arrow that I know Ill never reach. Just to wipe my nose. Do it fast, okay, Thresh? Conflicting emotions cross Threshs face. He lowers the rock and points at me, almost accusingly. Just this one time, I let you go. For the little girl. You and me, were even then. No more owed. You understand? I nod because I do understand. About owing. About hating it. I understand that if Thresh

wins, hell have to go back and face a district that has already broken all the rules to thank me, and he is breaking the rules to thank me, too. And I understand that, for the moment, Thresh is not going to smash in my skull. Clove! Catos voice is much nearer now. I can tell by the pain in it that he sees her on the ground. You better run now, Fire Girl, says Thresh. I dont need to be told twice. I flip over and my feet dip into the hard-packed earth as I run away from Thresh and Clove and the sound of Catos voice. Only when I reach the woods do I turn back for an instant. Thresh and both large backpacks are vanishing over the edge of the plain into the

area Ive never seen. Cato kneels beside Clove, spear in hand, begging her to stay with him. In a moment, he will realize its futile, she cant be saved. I crash into the trees, repeatedly swiping away the blood thats pouring into my eye, fleeing like the wild, wounded creature I am. After a few minutes, I hear the cannon and I know that Clove has died, that Cato will be on one of our trails. Either Threshs or mine. Im seized with terror, weak from my head wound, shaking. I load an arrow, but Cato can throw that spear almost as far as I can shoot. Only one thing calms me down. Thresh

has Catos backpack containing the thing he needs desperately. If I had to bet, Cato headed out after Thresh, not me. Still I dont slow down when I reach the water. I plunge right in, boots still on, and flounder downstream. I pull off Rues socks that Ive been using for gloves and press them into my forehead, trying to staunch the flow of blood, but theyre soaked in minutes. Somehow I make it back to the cave. I squeeze through the rocks. In the dappled light, I pull the little orange backpack from my arm, cut open the clasp, and dump the contents on the ground. One slim box containing one hypodermic needle. Without hesitating, I jam the needle into Peetas arm and slowly press down on the plunger. My hands go to my head and then drop to my lap, slick with blood. The last thing I remember is an exquisitely beautiful green-and-silver moth landing on the curve of my wrist.

22.

The sound of rain drumming on the roof of our house gently pulls me toward consciousness. I fight to return to sleep though, wrapped in a warm cocoon of

blankets, safe at home. Im vaguely aware that my head aches. Possibly I have the flu and this is why Im allowed to stay in bed, even though I can tell Ive been asleep a long time. My mothers hand strokes my cheek and I dont push it away as I would in wakefulness, never wanting her to know how much I crave that gentle touch. How much I miss her even though I still dont trust her. Then theres a voice, the wrong voice, not my mothers, and Im scared. Katniss, it says. Katniss, can you hear me? My eyes open and the sense of security vanishes. Im not home, not with my mother. Im in a dim, chilly cave, my bare feet freezing despite the cover, the air tainted with the unmistakable smell of blood. The haggard, pale face of a boy slides into view, and after an initial jolt of alarm, I feel better. Peeta. Hey, he says. Good to see your eyes again. How long have I been out? I ask. Not sure. I woke up yesterday evening and you were lying next to me in a very scary pool of blood, he says. I think its stopped finally, but I wouldnt sit up or anything. I gingerly lift my hand to my head and find it bandaged. This simple gesture leaves me weak and dizzy. Peeta holds a bottle to my lips and I drink thirstily. Youre better, I say. Much better. Whatever you shot into my arm did the trick, he says. By this morning, almost all the swelling in

my leg was gone. He

doesnt seem angry about my tricking him, drugging him, and running off to the feast. Maybe Im just too beat-up and Ill hear about it later when Im stronger. But for the moment, hes all gentleness. Did you eat? I ask. Im sorry to say I gobbled down three pieces of that groosling before I realized it might have to last a while. Dont worry, Im back on a strict diet, he says. No, its good. You need to eat. Ill go hunting soon, I say. Not too soon, all right? he says. You just let me take care of you for a while. I dont really seem to have much choice. Peeta feeds me bites of groosling and raisins and makes me drink plenty of water. He rubs some warmth back into my feet and wraps them in his jacket before tucking the sleeping bag back up around my chin. Your boots and socks are still damp and the weathers not helping much, he says. Theres a clap of thunder, and I see lightning electrify the sky through an opening in the rocks. Rain drips through several holes in the ceiling, but Peeta has built a sort of canopy over my head an upper body by wedging the square of plastic into the rock above me. I wonder what brought on this storm? I mean, whos the target? says Peeta.

Cato and Thresh, I say without thinking. Foxface will be in her den somewhere, and Clove . . . She cut me an then . . . My voice trails off. I know Cloves dead. I saw it in the sky last night, h says. Did you kill her? No. Thresh broke her skull with a rock, I say. Lucky he didnt catch you, too, says Peeta. The memory of the feast returns full-force and I feel sick. He did. But he let me go. Then, of course, I have to tell him. About things Ive kept to myself because he was too sick to ask and I wasnt ready to relive anyway. Like the explosion and my ear and Rues dying and the boy from District 1 and the bread. All of which leads to what happened with Thresh and how he was paying off a debt of sorts. He let you go because he didnt want to owe you anything? asks Peeta in disbelief. Yes. I dont expect you to understand it. Youve always had enough. But if youd lived in the Seam, I wouldnt have to explain, I say. And dont try. Obviously Im too dim to get it. Its like the bread. How I never seem to get over owing you for that, I say. The bread? What? From when we were kids? he says. I think we can let that go. I mean, you just brought me back from the dead. But you didnt know me. We had never even spoken. Besides, its the first gift thats always the hardest to pay back. I wouldnt even have been here to do it if you hadnt helped

me then, I say. Why did you, anyway? Why? You know why, Peeta says. I give my head a slight, painful shake. Haymitch said you would take a lot of convincing. Haymitch? I ask. Whats he got to do with it? Nothing, Peeta says. So, Cato and Thresh, huh? I guess its too much to hope that theyll simultaneously destroy each other? But the thought only upsets me. I think we would like Thresh. I think hed be our friend back in District Twelve, I say. Then lets hope Cato kills

him, so we dont have to, says Peeta grimly. I dont want Cato to kill Thresh at all. I dont want anyone else to die. But this is absolutely not the kind of thing that victors go around saying in the arena. Despite my best efforts, I can feel tears starting to pool in my eyes. Peeta looks at me in concern. What is it? Are you in a lot of pain? I give him another answer, because it is equally true but can be taken as a brief moment of weakness instead of a terminal one. I want to go home, Peeta, I say plaintively, like a small child. You will. I promise, he says, and bends over to give me a kiss. I want to go home now, I say. Tell you what. You go back to sleep and dream of home. And youll be there for real before you know it, lie says. Okay? Okay, I whisper.

Wake me if you need me to keep watch. Im good and rested, thanks to you and Haymitch. Besides, who knows how long this will last? he says. What does he mean? The storm? The brief respite ii brings us? The Games themselves? I dont know, but Im ion sad and tired to ask. Its evening when Peeta wakes me again. The rain has turned to a downpour, sending streams of water through our ceiling where earlier there had been only drips. Peeta has placed the broth pot under the worst one and repositioned the plastic to deflect most of it from me. I feel a bit better, able to sit up without getting too dizzy, and Im absolutely famished. So is Peeta. Its clear hes been waiting for me to wake up to eat and is eager to get started. Theres not much left. Two pieces of groosling, a small mishmash of roots, and a handful of dried fruit. Should we try and ration it? Peeta asks. No, lets just finish it. The grooslings getting old anyway, and the last thing we need is to get sick off spoiled food, I say, dividing the food into two equal piles. We try and eat slowly, but were both so hungry were done in a couple of minutes. My stomach is in no way satisfied. Tomorrows a hunting day, I say. I wont be much help with that, Peeta says. Ive never hunted before. Ill kill and you cook, I say. And you can always gather. I wish there was some sort of bread bush out there,

says Peeta. The bread they sent me from District Eleven was still warm, I say with a sigh. Here, chew these. I hand him a couple of mint leaves and pop a few in my own mouth. Its hard to even see the projection in the sky, but its clear enough to know there were no more deaths today. So Cato and Thresh havent had it out yet. Where did Thresh go? I mean, whats on the far side of the circle? I ask Peeta. A field. As far as you can see its full of grasses as high as my shoulders. I dont know, maybe some of them are grain. There are patches of different colors. But there are no paths, says Peeta. I bet some of them are grain. I bet Thresh knows which ones, too, I say. Did you go in there? No. Nobody really wanted to track Thresh down in that grass. It has a sinister feeling to it. Every time I look at that field, all I can think of are hidden things. Snakes, and

rabid animals, and quicksand, Peeta says. There could be anything in there. I dont say so but Peetas words remind me of the warnings they give us about not going beyond the fence in District 12. I cant help, for a moment, comparing him with Gale, who would see that field as a potential source of food as well as a threat. Thresh

certainly did. Its not that Peetas soft exactly, and hes proved hes not a coward. But there are things you dont question too much, I guess, when your home always smells like baking bread, whereas Gale questions everything. What would Peeta think of the irreverent banter that passes between us as we break the law each day? Would it shock him? The things we say about Panem? Gales tirades against the Capitol? Maybe there is a bread bush in that field, I say. Maybe thats why Thresh looks better fed now than when we started the Games. Either that or hes got very generous sponsors, says Peeta. I wonder what wed have to do to get Haymitch to send us some bread. I raise my eyebrows before I remember he doesnt know about the message Haymitch sent us a couple of nights ago. One kiss equals one pot of broth. Its not the sort of thing I can blurt out, either. To say my thoughts aloud would be tipping off the audience that the romance has been fabricated to play on their sympathies and that would result in no food at all. Somehow, believably, Ive got to get things back on track. Something simple to start with. I reach out and take his hand. Well, he probably used up a lot of resources helping me knock you out, I say mischievously. Yeah, about that, says Peeta, entwining his fingers in mine. Dont try something likethat again. Or what? I ask. Or . . . Or . . . He cant think of anything good. Just give me a minute. Whats the problem? I say with a grin. The problem is were both still alive. Which only reinforces the idea in your mind that you did the right thing, says Peeta. I did do the right thing, I say. No! Just dont, Katniss! His grip tightens, hurting my hand, and theres real anger in his voice. Dont die for me. You wont be doing me any favors. All right? Im startled by his intensity but recognize an excellent opportunity for getting food, so I try to keep up. Maybe I did it for myself, Peeta, did you ever think of that? Maybe you arent the only one who . . . Who worries about . . . What it would be like if. . . I fumble. Im not as smooth with words as Peeta. And while I was talking, the idea of actually losing Peeta hit me again and I realized how much I dont want him to die. And its not about the sponsors. And its not about what will happen back home. And its not just that I dont want to be alone. Its him. I do not want to lose the boy with the bread. If what, Katniss? he says softly. I wish I could pull the shutters closed, blocking out this moment from the prying eyes of Panem. Even if it means losing food. Whatever Im feeling, its no ones business but mine. Thats exactly the kind of topic Haymitch told me to steer clear of, I


say evasively, although Haymitch never said anything of the kind. In fact, hes probably cursing me out right now for dropping the ball during such an emotionally charged moment. But Peeta somehow catches it. Then Ill just have to fill in the blanks myself, he says, and moves in to me. This is the first kiss that were both fully aware of. Neither of us hobbled by sickness or pain or simply unconscious. Our lips neither burning with fever or icy cold. This is the first kiss where I actually feel stirring inside my chest. Warm and curious. This is the first kiss that makes me want another. But I dont get it. Well, I do get a second kiss, but its just a light one on the tip of my nose because Peetas been distracted. I think your wound is bleeding again. Come on, lie down, its bedtime anyway, he says. My socks are dry enough to wear now. I make Peeta put his jacket back on. The damp cold seems to cut right down to my bones, so he must be half frozen. I insist on taking the first watch, too, although neither of us think its likely anyone will come in this weather. But he wont agree unless Im in the bag, too, and Im shivering so hard that its pointless to object. In stark contrast to two nights ago, when I felt Peeta was a million miles away, Im struck by his immediacy now. As we settle in, he pulls my head down to use his arm as a pillow, the other restsprotectively over me even when he goes to sleep. No one has held me like this in such a long time. Since my father died and I stopped trusting my mother, no one elses arms have made me feel this safe. With the aid of the glasses, I lie watching the drips of water splatter on the cave floor. Rhythmic and lulling. Several times, I drift off briefly and then snap awake, guilty and angry with myself. After three or four hours, I cant help it, I have to rouse Peeta because I cant keep my eyes open. He doesnt seem to mind. Tomorrow, when its dry, Ill find us a place so high in the trees we can both sleep in peace, I promise as I drift off. But tomorrow is no better in terms of weather. The deluge continues as if the Gamemakers are intent on washing us all away. The thunders so powerful it seems to shake the ground. Peetas considering heading out anyway to scavenge for food, but I tell him in this storm it would be pointless. He wont be able to see three feet in front of his face and hell only end up getting soaked to the skin for his troubles. He knows Im right, but the gnawing in our stomachs is becoming painful. The day drags on turning into evening and theres no break in the weather. Haymitch is our only hope, but nothing is forthcoming, either from lack of money everything will cost an exorbitant amount or because hes

dissatisfied with our performance. Probably the latter. Id be the first to admit were not exactly riveting today. Starving, weak from injuries, trying not to reopen wounds. Were sitting huddled together wrapped in the sleeping bag, yes, but mostly to keep warm. The most exciting thing

either of us does is nap. Im not really sure how to ramp up the romance. The kiss last night was nice, but working up to another will take some forethought. There are girls in the Seam, some of the merchant girls, too, who navigate these waters so easily. But Ive never had much time or use for it. Anyway, just a kiss isnt enough anymore clearly because if it was wed have gotten food last night. My instincts tell me Haymitch isnt just looking for physical affection, he wants something more personal. The sort of stuff he was trying to get me to tell about myself when we were practicing for the interview. Im rotten at it, but Peetas not. Maybe the best approach is to get him talking. Peeta, I say lightly. You said at the interview youd had a crush on me forever. When did forever start? Oh, lets see. I guess the first day of school. We were five. You had on a red plaid dress and your hair . . . It was in two braids instead of one. My father pointed you out when we were waiting to line up, Peeta says. Your father? Why? I ask. He said, See that little girl? I wanted to marry her mother, but she ran off with a coal miner, Peeta says. What? Youre making that up! I exclaim. No, true story, Peeta says. And I said, A coal miner? Why did she want a coal miner if she couldve had you? And he said, Because when he sings . . . Even the birds stop to listen. Thats true. They do. I mean, they did, I say. Im stunned and surprisingly moved, thinking of the baker telling this to Peeta. It strikes me that my own reluctance to sing, my own dismissal of music might not really be that I think its a waste of time. It might be because it reminds me too much of my father. So that day, in music assembly, the teacher asked who knew the valley song. Your hand shot right up in the air. She stood you up on a stool and had you sing it for us. And I swear, every bird outside the windows fell silent, Peeta says. Oh, please, I say, laughing. No, it happened. And right when your song ended, I knew just like your mother I was a goner, Peeta says. Then for the next eleven years, I tried to work up the nerve to talk to you. Without success, I add. Without success. So, in a way, my name being drawn in the reaping was a real piece of luck, says Peeta. For a moment, Im almost foolishly

happy and then confusion sweeps over me. Because were supposed to be making up this stuff, playing at being in love not actually being in love. But Peetas story has a ring of truth to it. That part about my father and the birds. And I did sing the first day of school, although I dont remember the song. And that red plaid dress . . . There was one, a hand-me-down to Prim that got washed to rags after my fathers death. It would explain another thing, too. Why Peeta took a beating to give me the bread on that awful hollow day. So, if those details are true . . . Could it all be true? You have a . . . Remarkable memory, I say haltingly. I remember everything about you, says Peeta, tucking a loose strand of hair

behind my ear. Youre the one who wasnt paying attention. I am now, I say. Well, I dont have much competition here, he says. I want to draw away, to close those shutters again, but I know I cant. Its as if I can hear Haymitch whispering in my ear, Say it! Say it! I swallow hard and get the words out. You dont have much competition anywhere. And this time, its me who leans in. Our lips have just barely touched when the clunk outside makes us jump. My bow comes up, the arrow readyto fly, but theres no other sound. Peeta peers through the rocks and then gives a whoop. Before I can stop him, lies out in the rain, then handing something in to me. A silver parachute attached to a basket. I rip it open at once and inside theres a feast fresh rolls, goat cheese, apples, and best of all, a tureen of that incredible lamb stew on wild rice. The very dish I told Caesar Flickerman was the most impressive thing the Capitol had to offer. Peeta wriggles back inside, his face lit up like the sun. I guess Haymitch finally got tired of watching us starve. I guess so, I answer. But in my head I can hear Haymitchs smug, if slightly exasperated, words, Yes, thats what Im looking lot, sweetheart.

23.

Every cell in my body wants me to dig into the stew and cram it, handful by handful into my mouth. But Peetas voice stops me. We better take it slow on that stew. Remember the first night on the train? The rich food made me sick and I wasnt even starving then. Youre right. And I could just inhale the whole thing! I say

regretfully. But I dont. We are quite sensible. We each have a roll, half an apple, and an egg-size serving of stew and rice. I make myself eat the stew in tiny spoonfuls they even sent us silverware and plates savoring each bite. When we finish, I stare longingly at the dish. I want more. Me, too. Tell you what. We wait an hour, if it stays down, then we get another serving, Peeta says. Agreed, I say. Its going to be a long hour. Maybe not that long, says Peeta. What was that you were saying just before the food arrived? Something about me . . . No competition . . . Best thing that ever happened to you . . . I dont remember that last part, I say, hoping its too dim in here for the cameras to pick up my blush. Oh, thats right. Thats what I was thinking, he says. Scoot over, Im freezing. I make room for him in the sleeping bag. We lean back against the cave wall, my head on his shoulder, his arms wrapped around me. I can feel Haymitch nudging me to keep up the act. So, since we were five, you never even noticed any other girls? I ask him. No, I noticed just about every girl, but none of them made a lasting impression but you, he says. Im sure that would thrill your parents, you liking a girl from the Seam, I say. Hardly. But I couldnt care less. Anyway, if we make it back, you wont be a girl from the Seam, youll be a girl from the

Victors Village, he says. Thats right. If we win, well each get a house in the part of town reserved for Hunger Games victors. Long ago,

when the Games began, the Capitol had built a dozen fine houses in each district. Of course, in ours only one is occupied. Most of the others have never been lived in at all. A disturbing thought hits me. But then, our only neighbor will be Haymitch! Ah, thatll be nice, says Peeta, tightening his arms around me. You and me and Haymitch. Very cozy. Picnics, birthdays, long winter nights around the fire retelling old Hunger Games tales. I told you, he hates me! I say, but I cant help laughing at the image of Haymitch becoming my new pal. Only sometimes. When hes sober, Ive never heard him say one negative thing about you, says Peeta. Hes never sober! I protest. Thats right. Who am I thinking of? Oh, I know. Its Cinna who likes you. But thats mainly because you didnt try to run when he set you on fire, says Peeta. On the other hand, Haymitch . . . Well, if I were you, Id avoid Haymitch completely. He hates you. I thought you said I was his favorite, I say. He hates me more, says Peeta. I dont think people in general are his sort of thing. I know the

audience will enjoy our having fun at Haymitchs expense. He has been around so long, hes practically an old friend to some of them. And after his head-dive off the stage at the reaping, everybody knows him. By this time, theyll have dragged him out of the control room for interviews about us. No telling what sort of lies hes made up. Hes at something of a disadvantage because most mentors have a partner, another victor to help them whereas Haymitch has to be ready to go into action at any moment. Kind of like me when I was alone in the arena. I wonder how hes holding up, with the drinking, the attention, and the stress of trying to keep us alive. Its funny. Haymitch and I dont get along well in person, but maybe Peeta is right about us being alike because he seems able to communicate with me by the timing of his gifts. Like how I knew I must be close to water when he withheld it and how I knew the sleep syrup just wasnt something to ease Peetas pain and how I know now that I have to play up the romance. He hasnt made much effort to connect with Peeta really. Perhaps he thinks a bowl of broth would just be a bowl of broth to Peeta, whereas Ill see the strings attached to it. A thought hits me, and Im amazed the questions taken so long to surface. Maybe its because Ive only recently begun to view Haymitch with

a degree of curiosity. How do you think he did it? Who? Did what? Peeta asks. Haymitch. How do you think he won the Games? I say. Peeta considers this quite a while before he answers. Haymitch is sturdily built, but no physical wonder like Cato or Thresh. Hes not particularly handsome. Not in the way that causes sponsors to rain gifts on you. And hes so surly, its hard to imagine anyone teaming up with him. Theres only one way Haymitch could have won, and Peeta says it just as Im reaching this conclusion myself. He outsmarted the others, says Peeta. I nod, then let the conversation drop. But secretly

Im wondering if Haymitch sobered up long enough to help Peeta and me because he thought we just might have the wits to survive. Maybe he wasnt always a drunk. Maybe, in the beginning, he tried to help the tributes. But then it got unbearable. It must be hell to mentor two kids and then watch them die. Year after year after year. I realize that if I get out of here, that will become my job. To mentor the girl from District 12. The idea is so repellent, I thrust it from my mind. About half an hour has passed before I decide I have to eat again. Peetas too hungry himself to

put up an argument. While Im dishing up two more small servings of lamb stew and rice, we hear the anthem begin to play. Peeta presses his eyes against a crack in the rocks to watch the sky. There wont be anything to see tonight, I say, far more interested in the stew than the sky. Nothings happened or we wouldve heard a cannon. Katniss, Peeta says quietly. What? Should we split another roll, too? I ask. Katniss, he repeats, but I find myself wanting to ignore him. Im going to split one. But Ill save the cheese for tomorrow, I say. I see Peeta staring at me. What? Thresh is dead, says Peeta. He cant be, I say. They must have fired the cannon during the thunder and we missed it, says Peeta. Are you sure? I mean, its pouring buckets out there. I dont know how you can see anything, I say. I push him away from the rocks and squint out into the dark, rainy sky. For about ten seconds, I catch a distorted glimpse of Threshs picture and then hes gone. Just like that. I slump down against the rocks, momentarily forgetting about the task at hand. Thresh dead. I should be happy, right? One less tribute to face. And a powerful one, too. But Im not happy. All I can think about is Thresh letting me go, letting me run because of Rue, who died with that spear in her stomach. . . . You all right? asks Peeta. I give a noncommittal

shrug and cup my elbows in my hands, hugging them close to my body. I have to bury the real pain because whos going to bet on a tribute who keeps sniveling over the deaths of her opponents. Rue was one thing. We were allies. She was so young. But no one will understand my sorrow at Threshs murder. The word pulls me up short. Murder! Thankfully, I didnt say it aloud. Thats not going to win me any points in the arena. What I do say is, Its just . . . If we didnt win . . . I wanted Thresh to. Because he let me go. And because of Rue. Yeah, I know, says Peeta. But this means were one step closer to District Twelve. He nudges a plate of foot into my hands. Eat. Its still warm. I take a bite of the stew to show I dont really care, but its like glue in my mouth and takes a lot of effort to swallow. It also means Cato will be back hunting us. And hes got supplies again, says Peeta. Hell be wounded, I bet, I say. What makes you say that? Peeta asks. Because Thresh would have never gone down without a fight. Hes so strong, I mean, he was. And they were in his territory, I say.

Good, says Peeta. The more wounded Cato is the better. I wonder how Foxface is making out. Oh, shes fine, I say peevishly. Im still angry she thought of hiding in

the Cornucopia and I didnt. Probably be easier to catch Cato than her. Maybe theyll catch each other and we can just go home, says Peeta. But we better be extra careful about the watches. I dozed off a few times. Me, too, I admit. But not tonight. We finish our food in silence and then Peeta offers to take the first watch. I burrow down in the sleeping bag next to him, pulling my hood up over my face to hide it from the cameras. I just need a few moments of privacy where I can let any emotion cross my face without being seen. Under the hood, I silently say good-bye to Thresh and thank him for my life. I promise to remember him and, if I can, do something to help his family and Rues, if I win. Then I escape into sleep, comforted by a full belly and the steady warmth of Peeta beside me. When Peeta wakes me later, the first thing I register is the smell of goat cheese. Hes holding out half a roll spread with the creamy white stuff and topped with apple slices. Dont be mad, he says. I had to eat again. Heres your half. Oh, good, I say, immediately taking a huge bite. The strong fatty cheese tastes just like the kind Prim makes, the apples are sweet and crunchy. Mm. We make a goat cheese and apple tart at the bakery, he says. Bet thats expensive, I say. Too expensive for my family to eat. Unless its gone very stale. Of course,

practically everything we eat is stale, says Peeta, pulling the sleeping bag up around him. In less than a minute, hes snoring. Huh. I always assumed the shopkeepers live a soft life. And its true, Peeta has always had enough to eat. But theres something kind of depressing about living your life on stale bread, the hard, dry loaves that no one else wanted. One thing about us, since I bring our food home on a daily basis, most of it is so fresh you have to make sure it isnt going to make a run for it. Somewhere during my shift, the rain stops not gradually but all at once. The downpour ends and theres only the residual drippings of water from branches, the rush of the now overflowing stream below us. A full, beautiful moon emerges, and even without the glasses I can see outside. I cant decide if the moon is real or merely a projection of the Gamemakers. I know it was full shortly before I left home. Gale and I watched it rise as we hunted into the late hours. How long have I been gone? Im guessing its been about two weeks in the arena, and there was that week of preparation in the Capitol. Maybe the moon has completed its cycle. For some reason, I badly want it to be my moon, the same one I see from the woods around District 12. That would give me something to cling to in the surreal world of the arena

where the authenticity of everything is to be doubted. Four of us left. For the first time, I allow myself to truly think about the possibility that I might make it home.

To fame. To wealth. To my own house in the Victors Village. My mother and Prim would live there with me. No more fear of hunger. A new kind of freedom. But then . . . What? What would my life be like on a daily basis? Most of it has been consumed with the acquisition of food. Take that away and Im not really sure who I am, what my identity is. The idea scares me some. I think of Haymitch, with all his money. What did his life become? He lives alone, no wife or children, most of his waking hours drunk. I dont want to end up like that. But you wont be alone, I whisper to myself. I have my mother and Prim. Well, for the time being. And then . . . I dont want to think about then, when Prim has grown up, my mother passed away. I know Ill never marry, never risk bringing a child into the world. Because if theres one thing being a victor doesnt guarantee, its your childrens safety. My kids names would go right into the reaping balls with everyone elses. And I swear Ill never let that happen. The sun eventually rises, its light slipping through the cracks and illuminating Peetas face. Who will he transform into if we make it home? This perplexing, good-natured boy who can spin out lies so convincingly the whole of Panem believes him to be hopelessly in love with me, and Ill admit it, there are moments when he makes me believe it myself? At least, well be friends, I think. Nothing will change the fact that weve saved each others lives in here. And beyond that, he will always be the boy with the bread. Good friends. Anything beyond that though . . . And I feel Gales gray eyes watching me watching Peeta, all the way from District 12. Discomfort causes me to move. I scoot over and shake Peetas shoulder. His eyes open sleepily and when they focus on me, he pulls me down for a long kiss. Were wasting hunting time, I say when I finally break away. I wouldnt call it wasting, he says giving a big stretch as he sits up. So do we hunt on empty stomachs to give us an edge? Not us, I say. We stuff ourselves to give us staying power. Count me in, Peeta says. But I can see hes surprised when I divide the rest of the stew and rice and hand a heaping plate to him. All this? Well earn it back today, I say, and we both plow into our plates. Even cold, its one of the best things Ive ever tasted. I abandon my fork and scrape up the last dabs of gravy with my finger. I can feel Effie Trinket shuddering at my manners. Hey,

Effie, watch this! says Peeta. He tosses his fork over his shoulder and literally licks his plate clean with his tongue making loud, satisfied sounds. Then he blows a kiss out to her in general and calls, We miss you, Effie! I cover his mouth with my hand, but Im laughing. Stop! Cato could be right outside our cave. He grabs my hand away. What do I care? Ive got you to protect me now, says Peeta, pulling me to him. Come on, I say in exasperation, extricating myself from his grasp but not before he gets in another kiss. Once were packed up and standing

outside our cave, our mood shifts to serious. Its as though for the last few days, sheltered by the rocks and the rain and Catos preoccupation with Thresh, we were given a respite, a holiday of sorts. Now, although the day is sunny and warm, we both sense were really back in the Games. I hand Peeta my knife, since whatever weapons he once had are long gone, and he slips it into his belt. My last seven arrows of the twelve I sacrificed three in the explosion, two at the feast rattle a bit too loosely in the quiver. I cant afford to lose any more. Hell be hunting us by now, says Peeta. Cato isnt one to wait for his prey to wander by. If hes wounded I begin. It wont matter,Peeta breaks in. If he can move, hes coming. With all the rain, the stream has overrun its banks by several feet on either side. We stop there to replenish our water. I check the snares I set days ago and come up empty. Not surprising with the weather. Besides, I havent seen many animals or signs of them in this area. If we want food, we better head back up to my old hunting grounds, I say. Your call. Just tell me what you need me to do, Peeta says. Keep an eye out, I say. Stay on the rocks as much as possible, no sense in leaving him tracks to follow. And listen for both of us. Its clear, at this point, that the explosion destroyed the hearing in my left ear for good. Id walk in the water to cover our tracks completely, but Im not sure Peetas leg could take the current. Although the drugs have erased the infection, hes still pretty weak. My forehead hurts along the knife cut, but after three days the bleeding has stopped. I wear a bandage around my head though, just in case physical exertion should bring it back. As we head up alongside the stream, we pass the place where I found Peeta camouflaged in the weeds and mud. One good thing, between the downpour and the flooded banks, all signs of his hiding place have been wiped out. That means that, if need be, we can come back to our cave. Otherwise, I wouldnt risk

it with Cato after us. The boulders diminish to rocks that eventually turn to pebbles, and then, to my relief, were back on pine needles and the gentle incline of the forest floor. For the first time, I realize we have a problem. Navigating the rocky terrain with a bad leg well, youre naturally going to make some noise. But even on the smooth bed of needles, Peeta is loud. And I mean loud loud, as if hes stomping his feet or something. I turn and look at him. What? he asks. Youve got to move more quietly, I say. Forget about Cato, youre chasing off every rabbit in a ten-mile radius. Really? he says. Sorry, I didnt know. So, we start up again and hes a tiny bit better, but even with only one working ear, hes making me jump. Can you take your boots off? I suggest. Here? he asks in disbelief, as if Id asked him to walk barefoot on hot coals or something. I have to remind myself that hes still not used to the woods, that its the scary, forbidden place beyond the fences of

District 12. I think of Gale, with his velvet tread. Its eerie how little sound he makes, even when the leaves have fallen and its a challenge to move at all without chasing off the game. I feel certain hes laughing back home. Yes, I say patiently. I will, too. That way well both be quieter. Like I was making any noise. So we both strip off our boots and socks and, while theres some improvement, I could swear hes making an effort to snap every branch we encounter. Needless to say, although it takes several hours to reach my old camp with Rue, Ive shot nothing. If the stream would settle down, fish might be an option, but the current is still too strong. As we stop to rest and drink water, I try to work out a solution. Ideally, Id dump Peeta now with some simple root-gathering chore and go hunt, but then hed be left with only a knife to defend himself against Catos spears and superior strength. So what Id really like is to try and conceal him somewhere safe, then go hunt, and come back and collect him. But I have a feeling his ego isnt going to go for that suggestion. Katniss, he says. We need to split up. I know Im chasing away the game. Only because your legs hurt, I say generously, because really, you can tell thats only a small part of the problem. I know, he says. So, why dont you go on? Show me some plants to gather and that way well both be useful. Not if Cato comes and kills you. I tried to say it in a nice way, but it still sounds like I think hes a weakling. Surprisingly, he just laughs. Look, I can handle Cato. I fought him before, didnt I? Yeah, and that turned

out great. You ended up dying in a mud bank. Thats what I want to say, but I cant. He did save my life by taking on Cato after all. I try another tactic. What if you climbed up in a tree and acted as a lookout while I hunted? I say, trying to make it sound like very important work. What if you show me whats edible around here and go get us some meat? he says, mimicking my tone. Just dont go far, in case you need help. I sigh and show him some roots to dig. We do need food, no question. One apple, two rolls, and a blob of cheese the size of a plum wont last long. Ill just go a short distance and hope Cato is a long way off. I teach him a bird whistle not a melody like Rues but a simple two-note whistle which we can use to communicate that were all right. Fortunately, hes good at this. Leaving him with the pack, I head off. I feel like Im eleven again, tethered not to the safety of the fence but to Peeta, allowing myself twenty, maybe thirty yards of hunting space. Away from him though, the woods come alive with animal sounds. Reassured by his periodic whistles, I allow myself to drift farther away, and soon have two rabbits and a fat squirrel to show for it. I decide its enough. I can set snares and maybe get some fish. With Peetas roots, this will be enough for now. As I travel the short distance back, I realize we havent

exchanged signals in a while. When my whistle receives no

response, I run. In no time, I find the pack, a neat pile of roots beside it. The sheet of plastic has been laid on the ground where the sun can reach the single layer of berries that covers it. But where is he? Peeta! I call out in a panic. Peeta! I turn to the rustle of brush and almost send an arrow through him. Fortunately, I pull my bow at the last second and it sticks in an oak trunk to his left. He jumps back, flinging a handful of berries into the foliage. My fear comes out as anger. What are you doing? Youre supposed to be here, not running around in the woods! I found some berries down by the stream, he says, clearly confused by my outburst. I whistled. Why didnt you whistle back? I snap at him. I didnt hear. The waters too loud, I guess, he says. He crosses and puts his hands on my shoulders. Thats when I feel that Im trembling. I thought Cato killed you! I almost shout. No, Im fine. Peeta wraps his arms around me, but I dont respond. Katniss? I push away, trying to sort out my feelings. If two people agree on a signal, they stay in range. Because if one of them doesnt answer, theyre in trouble, all right? All right! he says. All right. Because thats what happened with Rue,

and I watched her die! I say. I turn away from him, go to the pack and open a fresh bottle of water, although I still have some in mine. But Im not ready to forgive him. I notice the food. The rolls and apples are untouched, but someones definitely picked away part of the cheese. And you ate without me! I really dont care, I just want something else to be mad about. What? No, I didnt, Peeta says. Oh, and I suppose the apples ate the cheese, I say. I dont know what ate the cheese, Peeta says slowly and distinctly, as if trying not to lose his temper, but it wasnt me. Ive been down by the stream collecting berries. Would you care for some? I would actually, but I dont want to relent too soon. I do walk over and look at them. Ive never seen this type before. No, I have. But not in the arena. These arent Rues berries, although they resemble them. Nor do they match any I learned about in training. I lean down and scoop up a few, rolling them between my fingers. My fathers voice comes back to me. Not these, Katniss. Never these. Theyre nightlock. Youll be dead before they reach your stomach. Just then, the cannon fires. I whip around, expecting Peeta to collapse to the ground, but he only raises his eyebrows. The hovercraft appears a hundred yards or so away. Whats left of Foxfaces emaciated body is lifted into the air.

I can see the red glint of her hair in the sunlight. I should have known the moment I saw the missing cheese. . . . Peeta has me by the arm, pushing me toward a tree. Climb. Hell be here in a second. Well stand a better chance fighting him from above. I stop him, suddenly calm. No, Peeta, shes your kill, not Catos. What? I havent even seen her since the first day, he says. How could I have killed her? In answer, I hold out the berries.

24.

It takes a while to

explain the situation to Peeta. How Foxface stole the food from the supply pile before I blew it up, how she tried to take enough to stay alive but not enough that anyone would notice it, how she wouldnt question the safety of berries we were preparing to eat ourselves. I wonder how she found us, says Peeta. My fault, I guess, if Im as loud as you say. We were about as hard to follow as a herd of cattle, but I try

to be kind. And shes very clever, Peeta. Well, she was. Until you outfoxed her. Not on purpose. Doesnt seem fair somehow. I mean, we would have both been dead, too, if she hadnt eaten the berries first. He checks himself. No, of course, we wouldnt. You recognized them, didnt you? I give a nod. We call them nightlock. Even the name sounds deadly, he says. Im sorry, Katniss. I really thought they were the same ones youd gathered. Dont apologize. It just means were one step closer to home, right? I ask. Ill get rid of the rest, Peeta says. He gathers up the sheet of blue plastic, careful to trap the berries inside, and goes to toss them into the woods. Wait! I cry. I find the leather pouch that belonged to the boy from District 1 and fill it with a few handfuls of berries from the plastic. If they fooled Foxface, maybe they can fool Cato as well. If hes chasing us or something, we can act like we accidentally drop the pouch and if he eats them Then hello District Twelve, says Peeta. Thats it, I say, securing the pouch to my belt. Hell know where we are now, says Peeta. If he was anywhere nearby and saw that hovercraft, hell know we killed her and come after us. Peetas right. This could be just the opportunity Catos been waiting for. But even if we run now, theres the meat to cook and our fire will be another sign of our whereabouts. Lets make a fire. Right

now. I begin to gather branches and brush. Are you ready to face him? Peeta asks. Im ready to eat. Better to cook our food while we have the chance. If he knows were here, he knows. But he also knows theres two of us and probably assumes we were hunting Foxface. That means youre recovered. And the fire means were not hiding, were inviting him here. Would you show up? I ask. Maybe not, he says. Peetas a whiz with fires, coaxing a blaze out of the damp wood. In no time, I have the rabbits and squirrel roasting, the roots, wrapped in leaves, baking in the coals. We take turns gathering greens and keeping a careful watch for Cato, but as I anticipated, he doesnt make an appearance. When the foods cooked, I pack most of it up, leaving us each a rabbits leg to eat as we walk. I want to move higher into the woods, climb a good tree, and make camp for the night, but Peeta resists. I cant climb like you, Katniss, especially with my leg, and I dont think I could ever fall asleep fifty feet above the ground. Its not safe to stay in the open, Peeta, I say. Cant we go back to the cave? he asks. Its near water and easy to defend. I sigh. Several more hours of walking or should I say crashing through


the woods to reach an area well just have to leave in the morning to hunt. But Peeta doesnt ask for much. Hes followed my instructions all day and Im sure if things were reversed, he wouldnt make me spend the night in a tree. It dawns on me that I havent been very nice to Peeta today. Nagging him about how loud he was, screaming at him over disappearing. The playful romance we had sustained in the cave has disappeared out in the open, under the hot sun, with the threat of Cato looming over us. Haymitch has probably just about had it with me. And as for the audience . . . I reach up and give him a kiss. Sure. Lets go back to the cave. He looks pleased and relieved. Well, that was easy. I work my arrow out of the oak, careful not to damage the shaft. These arrows are food, safety, and life itself now. We toss a bunch more wood on the fire. It should be sending off smoke for a few more hours, although I doubt Cato assumes anything at this point. When we reach the stream, I see the water has dropped considerably and moves at its old leisurely pace, so I suggest we walk back in it. Peetas happy to oblige and since hes a lot quieter in water than on land, its a doubly good idea. Its a long walk back to the cave though, even going downward, even with the rabbit to give us a boost. Were both exhausted by our

hike today and still way too underfed. I keep my bow loaded, both for Cato and any fish I might see, but the stream seems strangely empty of creatures. By the time we reach our destination, our feet are dragging and the sun sits low on the horizon. We fill up our water bottles and climb the little slope to our den. Its not much, but out here in the wilderness, its the closest thing we have to a home. It will be warmer than a tree, too, because it provides some shelter from the wind that has begun to blow steadily in from the west. I set a good dinner out, but halfway through Peeta begins to nod off. After days of inactivity, the hunt has taken its toll. I order him into the sleeping bag and set aside the rest of his food for when he wakes. He drops off immediately. I pull the sleeping bag up to his chin and kiss his forehead, not for the audience, but for me. Because Im so grateful that hes still here, not dead by the stream as Id thought. So glad that I dont have to face Cato alone. Brutal, bloody Cato who can snap a neck with a twist of his arm, who had the power to overcome Thresh, who has had it out for me since the beginning. He probably has had a special hatred for me ever since I outscored him in training. A boy like Peeta would simply shrug that off. But I have a feeling it drove Cato to distraction. Which is not that hard. I

think of his ridiculous reaction to finding the supplies blown up. The others were upset, of course, but he was completely unhinged. I wonder now if Cato might not be entirely sane. The sky lights up with the seal, and I watch Foxface shine in the sky and then disappear from the world forever. He hasnt said it, but I

dont think Peeta felt good about killing her, even if it was essential. I cant pretend Ill miss her, but I have to admire her. My guess is if they had given us some sort of test, she would have been the smartest of all the tributes. If, in fact, we had been setting a trap for her, I bet shed have sensed it and avoided the berries. It was Peetas own ignorance that brought her down. Ive spent so much time making sure I dont underestimate my opponents that Ive forgotten its just as dangerous to overestimate them as well. That brings me back to Cato. But while I think I had a sense of Foxface, who she was and how she operated, hes a little more slippery. Powerful, well trained, but smart? I dont know. Not like she was. And utterly lacking in the control Foxface demonstrated. I believe Cato could easily lose his judgment in a fit of temper. Not that I can feel superior on that point. I think of the moment I sent the arrow flying into the apple in the pigs mouth when I was so enraged. Maybe I do understand Cato better than I think. Despite the fatigue in my body, my minds alert, so I let Peeta sleep long past our usual switch. In fact, a soft gray day has begun when I shake his shoulder. He looks out, almost in alarm. I slept the whole night. Thats not fair, Katniss, you should have woken me. I stretch and burrow down into the bag. Ill sleep now. Wake me if anything interesting happens. Apparently nothing does, because when I open my eyes, bright hot afternoon light gleams through the rocks. Any sign of our friend? I ask. Peeta shakes his head. No, hes keeping a disturbingly low profile. How long do you think well have before the Gamemakers drive us together? I ask. Well, Foxface died almost a day ago, so theres been plenty of time for the audience to place bets and get bored. I guess it could happen at any moment, says Peeta. Yeah, I have a feeling todays the day, I say. I sit up and look out at the peaceful terrain. I wonder how theyll do it. Peeta remains silent. Theres not really any good answer. Well, until they do, no sense in wasting a hunting day. But we should probably eat as much as we can hold just in case we run into trouble, I say. Peeta packs up our gear while I lay out a big meal. The rest of the rabbits, roots,

greens, the rolls spread with the last bit of cheese. The only thing I leave in reserve is the squirrel and the apple. By the time were done, all thats left is a pile of rabbit bones. My hands are greasy, which only adds to my growing feeling of grubbiness. Maybe we dont bathe daily in the Seam, but we keep cleaner than I have of late. Except for my feet, which have walked in the stream, Im covered in a layer of grime. Leaving the cave has a sense of finality about it. I dont think there will be another night in the arena somehow. One way or the other, dead or alive, I have the feeling Ill escape it today. I give the rocks a pat good-bye and we head down to the stream to wash up. I can feel my skin, itching for the cool water. I

may do my hair and braid it back wet. Im wondering if we might even be able to give our clothes a quick scrub when we reach the stream. Or what used to be the stream. Now theres only a bone-dry bed. I put my hand down to feel it. Not even a little damp. They must have drained it while we slept, I say. A fear of the cracked tongue, aching body and fuzzy mind brought on by my previous dehydration creeps into my consciousness. Our bottles and skin are fairly full, but with two drinking and this hot sun it wont take long to deplete them. The lake, says Peeta. Thats where they want us to go. Maybe the ponds still have some, I say hopefully. We can check, he says, but hes just humoring me. Im humoring myself because I know what Ill find when we return to the pond where I soaked my leg. A dusty, gaping mouth of a hole. But we make the trip anyway just to confirm what we already know. Youre right. Theyre driving us to the lake, I say. Where theres no cover. Where theyre guaranteed a bloody fight to the death with nothing to block their view. Do you want to go straightaway or wait until the waters tapped out? Lets go now, while weve had food and rest. Lets just go end this thing, he says. I nod. Its funny. I feel almost as if its the first day of the Games again. That Im in the same position. Twenty-one tributes are dead, but I still have yet to kill Cato. And really, wasnt he always the one to kill? Now it seems the other tributes were just minor obstacles, distractions, keeping us from the real battle of the Games. Cato and me. But no, theres the boy waiting beside me. I feel his arms wrap around me. Two against one. Should be a piece of cake, he says. Next time we eat, it will be in the Capitol, I answer. You bet it will, he says. We stand there a while, locked in an embrace, feeling each other, the sunlight, the rustle of the

leaves at our feet. Then without a word, we break apart and head for the lake. I dont care now that Peetas footfalls send rodents scurrying, make birds take wing. We have to fight Cato and Id just as soon do it here as on the plain. But I doubt Ill have that choice. If the Gamemakers want us in the open, then in the open we will be. We stop to rest for a few moments under the tree where the Careers trapped me. The husk of the tracker jacker nest, beaten to a pulp by the heavy rains and dried in the burning sun, confirms the location. I touch it with the tip of my boot, and it dissolves into dust that is quickly carried off by the breeze. I cant help looking up in the tree where Rue secretly perched, waiting to save my life. Tracker jackers. Glimmers bloated body. The terrifying hallucinations . . . Lets move on, I say, wanting to escape the darkness that surrounds this place. Peeta doesnt object. Given our late start to the day, when we reach the plain its already early evening. Theres no sign of Cato. No sign of anything except the gold Cornucopia glowing in the slanting sun rays. Just in case Cato decided to pull a Foxface on

us, we circle the Cornucopia to make sure its empty. Then obediently, as if following instructions, we cross to the lake and fill our water containers. I frown at the shrinking sun. We dont want to fight him after dark. Theres only the one pair of glasses. Peeta carefully squeezes drops of iodine into the water. Maybe thats what hes waiting for. What do you want to do? Go back to the cave? Either that or find a tree. But lets give him another half an hour or so. Then well take cover, I answer. We sit by the lake, in full sight. Theres no point in hiding now. In the trees at the edge of the plain, I can see the mockingjays flitting about. Bouncing melodies back and forth between them like brightly colored balls. I open my mouth and sing out Rues four-note run. I can feel them pause curiously at the sound of my voice, listening for more. I repeat the notes in the silence. First one mockingjay trills the tune back, then another. Then the whole world comes alive with the sound. Just like your father, says Peeta. My fingers find the pin on my shirt. Thats Rues song, I say. I think they remember it. The music swells and I recognize the brilliance of it. As the notes overlap, they compliment one another, forming a lovely, unearthly harmony. It was this sound then, thanks to Rue, that sent the orchard workers of District 11 home each night. Does someone start it at quitting time, I wonder, now that she is dead?

For a while, I just close my eyes and listen, mesmerized by the beauty of the song. Then something begins to disrupt the music. Runs cut off in jagged, imperfect lines. Dissonant notes intersperse with the melody. The mockingjays voices rise up in a shrieking cry of alarm. Were on our feet, Peeta wielding his knife, me poised to shoot, when Cato smashes through the trees and bears down on us. He has no spear. In fact, his hands are empty, yet he runs straight for us. My first arrow hits his chest and inexplicably falls aside. Hes got some kind of body armor! I shout to Peeta. Just in time, too, because Cato is upon us. I brace myself, but he rockets right between us with no attempt to check his speed. I can tell from his panting, the sweat pouring off his purplish face, that hes been running hard a long time. Not toward us. From something. But what? My eyes scan the woods just in time to see the first creature leap onto the plain. As Im turning away, I see another half dozen join it. Then I am stumbling blindly after Cato with no thought of anything but to save myself.

25.Muttations. No question about it. Ive never seen these mutts, but theyre no natural-born animals. They resemble huge wolves, but what wolf lands and then balances easily on its hind legs? What wolf waves the rest of the pack forward with its front paw as though it had a wrist? These things I can see at a distance. Up close, Im sure their more menacing attributes will be revealed. Cato has made a beeline for the Cornucopia, and without question I follow him. If he thinks its the

safest place, who am I to argue? Besides, even if I could make it to the trees, it would be impossible for Peeta to outrun them on that leg Peeta! My hands have just landed on the metal at the pointed tail of the Cornucopia when I remember Im part of a team. Hes about fifteen yards behind me, hobbling as fast as he can, but the mutts are closing in on him fast. I send an arrow into the pack and one goes down, but there are plenty to take its place. Peetas waving me up the horn, Go, Katniss! Go! Hes right. I cant protect either of us on the ground. I start climbing, scaling the Cornucopia on my hands and feet. The pure gold surface has been designed to resemble the woven horn that we fill at harvest, so there are little ridges and seams to get a decent hold

on. But after a day in the arena sun, the metal feels hot enough to blister my hands. Cato lies on his side at the very top of the horn, twenty feet above the ground, gasping to catch his breath as he gags over the edge. Nows my chance to finish him off. I stop midway up the horn and load another arrow, but just as Im about to let it fly, I hear Peeta cry out. I twist around and see hes just reached the tail, and the mutts are right on his heels. Climb! I yell. Peeta starts up hampered by not only the leg but the knife in his hand. I shoot my arrow down the throat of the first mutt that places its paws on the metal. As it dies the creature lashes out, inadvertently opening gashes on a few of its companions. Thats when I get a look at the claws. Four inches and clearly razor-sharp. Peeta reaches my feet and I grab his arm and pull him along. Then I remember Cato waiting at the top and whip around, but hes doubled over with cramps and apparently more preoccupied with the mutts than us. He coughs out something unintelligible. The snuffling, growling sound coming from the mutts isnt helping. What? I shout at him. He said, Can they climb it? answers Peeta, drawing my focus back to the base of the horn. The mutts are beginning to assemble. As they join together, they raise up again to stand easily on their back legs giving them an eerily

human quality. Each has a thick coat, some with fur that is straight and sleek, others curly, and the colors vary from jet black to what I can only describe as blond. Theres something else about them, something that makes the hair rise up on the back of my neck, but I cant put my finger on it. They put their snouts on the horn, sniffing and tasting the metal, scraping paws over the surface and then making high-pitched yipping sounds to one another. This must be how they communicate because the pack backs up as if to make room. Then one of them, a good-size mutt with silky waves of blond fur takes a running start and leaps onto the horn. Its back legs must be incredibly powerful because it lands a mere ten feet below us, its pink lips pulled back in a snarl. For a moment it hangs there, and in that moment I realize what else unsettled me about the mutts. The green

eyes glowering at me are unlike any dog or wolf, any canine Ive ever seen. They are unmistakably human. And that revelation has barely registered when I notice the collar with the number 1 inlaid with jewels and the whole horrible thing hits me. The blonde hair, the green eyes, the number . . . Its Glimmer. A shriek escapes my lips

and Im having trouble holding the arrow in place. I have been waiting to fire, only too aware of my dwindling supply of arrows. Waiting to see if the creatures can, in fact, climb. But now, even though the mutt has begun to slide backward, unable to find any purchase on the metal, even though I can hear the slow screeching of the claws like nails on a blackboard, I fire into its throat. Its body twitches and flops onto the ground with a thud. Katniss? I can feel Peetas grip on my arm. Its her! I get out. Who? asks Peeta. My head snaps from side to side as I examine the pack, taking in the various sizes and colors. The small one with the red coat and amber eyes . . . Foxface! And there, the ashen hair and hazel eyes of the boy from District 9 who died as we struggled for the backpack! And worst of all, the smallest mutt, with dark glossy fur, huge brown eyes and a collar that reads 11 in woven straw. Teeth bared in hatred. Rue . . . What is it, Katniss? Peeta shakes my shoulder. Its them. Its all of them. The others. Rue and Foxface and . . . All of the other tributes, I choke out. I hear Peetas gasp of recognition. What did they do to them? You dont think . . . Those could be their real eyes? Their eyes are the least of my worries. What about their brains? Have they been given any of the real tributes memories ? Have they been programmed to hate our faces particularly because we have survived and they were so callously murdered? And the ones we actually killed . . . Do they believe theyre avenging their own deaths? Before I can get this out, the mutts begin a new assault on the horn. Theyve split into two groups at the sides of the horn and are using those powerful hindquarters to launch themselves at us. A pair of teeth ring together just inches from my hand and then I hear Peeta cry out, feel the yank on his body, the heavy weight of boy and mutt pulling me over the side. If not for the grip on my arm, hed be on the ground, but as it is, it takes all my strength to keep us both on the curved back of the horn. And more tributes are coming. Kill it, Peeta! Kill it! Im shouting, and although I cant quite see whats happening, I know he must have stabbed the thing because the pull lessens. Im able to haul him back onto the horn where we drag ourselves toward the top where the lesser of two evils awaits. Cato has still not regained his feet, but his breathing is slowing and I know soon hell be recovered enough to come for us, to hurl us over the side to our deaths. I arm my bow, but the arrow ends up taking out a mutt that can only be Thresh. Who else could jump so high? I feel a moments relief because we must finally be


up above the mutt line and Im just turning back to face Cato when Peetas jerked from my side. Im sure the pack has got him until his blood splatters my face. Cato stands before me, almost at the lip of the horn, holding Peeta in some kind of headlock, cutting off his air. Peetas clawing at Catos arm, but weakly, as if confused over whether its more important to breathe or try and stem the gush of blood from the gaping hole a mutt left in his calf. I aim one of my last two arrows at Catos head, knowing itll have no effect on his trunk or limbs, which I can now see are clothed in a skintight, flesh-colored mesh. Some high-grade body armor from the Capitol. Was that what was in his pack at the feast? Body armor to defend against my arrows? Well, they neglected to send a face guard. Cato just laughs. Shoot me and he goes down with me. Hes right. If I take him out and he falls to the mutts, Peeta is sure to die with him. Weve reached a stalemate. I cant shoot Cato without killing Peeta, too. He cant kill Peeta without guaranteeing an arrow in his brain. We stand like statues, both of us seeking an out. My muscles are strained so tightly, they feel they might snap at any moment. My teeth clenched to the breaking point. The mutts go silent and the only thing I can hear is the blood pounding in my good ear. Peetas lips are turning blue. If

I dont do something quickly, hell die of asphyxiation and then Ill have lost him and Cato will probably use his body as a weapon against me. In fact, Im sure this is Catos plan because while hes stopped laughing, his lips are set in a triumphant smile. As if in a last-ditch effort, Peeta raises his fingers, dripping with blood from his leg, up to Catos arm. Instead of trying to wrestle his way free, his forefinger veers off and makes a deliberate X on the back of Catos hand. Cato realizes what it means exactly one second after I do. I can tell by the way the smile drops from his lips. But its one second too late because, by that time, my arrow is piercing his hand. He cries out and reflexively releases Peeta who slams back against him. For a horrible moment, I think theyre both going over. I dive forward just catching hold of Peeta as Cato loses his footing on the blood-slick horn and pluminets to the ground. We hear him hit, the air leaving his body on impact, and then the mutts attack him. Peeta and I hold on to each other, waiting for the cannon, waiting for the competition to finish, waiting to be released. But it doesnt happen. Not yet. Because this is the climax of the Hunger Games, and the audience expects a show. I dont watch, but I can hear the snarls, the growls, the howls of pain from both human and beast as Cato takes on the mutt pack.

I cant understand how he can be surviving until I remember the body armor protecting him from ankle to neck and I realize what a long night this could be. Cato must have a knife or sword or something, too, something he had hidden in his clothes, because on occasion theres the

death scream of a mutt or the sound of metal on metal as the blade collides with the golden horn. The combat moves around the side of the Cornucopia, and I know Cato must be attempting the one maneuver that could save his life to make his way back around to the tail of the horn and rejoin us. But in the end, despite his remarkable strength and skill, he is simply overpowered. I dont know how long it has been, maybe an hour or so, when Cato hits the ground and we hear the mutts dragging him, dragging him back into the Cornucopia. Now theyll finish him off, I think. But theres still no cannon. Night falls and the anthem plays and theres no picture of Cato in the sky, only the faint moans coming through the metal beneath us. The icy air blowing across the plain reminds me that the Games are not over and may not be for who knows how long, and there is still no guarantee of victory. I turn my

attention to Peeta and discover his leg is bleeding as badly as ever. All our supplies, our packs, remain down by the lake where we abandoned them when we fled from the mutts. I have no bandage, nothing to staunch the flow of blood from his calf. Although Im shaking in the biting wind, I rip off my jacket, remove my shirt, and zip back into the jacket as swiftly as possible. That brief exposure sets my teeth chattering beyond control. Peetas face is gray in the pale moonlight. I make him lie down before I probe his wound. Warm, slippery blood runs over my fingers. A bandage will not be enough. Ive seen my mother tie a tourniquet a handful of times and try to replicate it. I cut free a sleeve from my shirt, wrap it twice around his leg just under his knee, and tie a half knot. I dont have a stick, so I take my remaining arrow and insert it in the knot, twisting it as tightly as I dare. Its risky business Peeta may end up losing his leg but when I weigh this against him losing his life, what alternative do I have? I bandage the wound in the rest of my shirt and lay down with him. Dont go to sleep, I tell him. Im not sure if this is exactly medical protocol, but Im terrified that if he drifts off hell never wake again. Are you cold? he asks. He unzips his jacket and I press against him as he fastens it around me. Its a bit warmer, sharing

our body heat inside my double layer of jackets, but the night is young. The temperature will continue to drop. Even now I can feel the Cornucopia, which burned so when I first climbed it, slowly turning to ice. Cato may win this thing yet, I whisper to Peeta. Dont you believe it, he says, pulling up my hood, but hes shaking harder than I am. The next hours are the worst in my life, which if you think about it, is saying something. The cold would be torture enough, but the real nightmare is listening to Cato, moaning, begging, and finally just whimpering as the mutts work away at him. After a very short time, I dont care who he is or what hes done, all I want is for his suffering to end. Why dont they just kill him? I ask Peeta.

You know why, he says, and pulls me closer to him. And I do. No viewer could turn away from the show now. From the Gamemakers point of view, this is the final word in entertainment. It goes on and on and on and eventually completely consumes my mind, blocking out memories and hopes of tomorrow, erasing everything but the present, which I begin to believe will never change. There will never be anything but cold and fear and the agonized sounds of the boy dying in the

horn. Peeta begins to doze off now, and each time he does, I find myself yelling his name louder and louder because if he goes and dies on me now, I know Ill go completely insane. Hes fighting it, probably more for me than for him, and its hard because unconsciousness would be its own form of escape. But the adrenaline pumping through my body would never allow me to follow him, so I cant let him go. I just cant. The only indication of the passage of time lies in the heavens, the subtle shift of the moon. So Peeta begins pointing it out to me, insisting I acknowledge its progress and sometimes, for just a moment I feel a flicker of hope before the agony of the night engulfs me again. Finally, I hear him whisper that the sun is rising. I open my eyes and find the stars fading in the pale light of dawn. I can see, too, how bloodless Peetas face has become. How little time he has left. And I know I have to get him back to the Capitol. Still, no cannon has fired. I press my good ear against the horn and can just make out Catos voice. I think hes closer now. Katniss, can you shoot him? Peeta asks. If hes near the mouth, I may be able to take him out. It would be an act of mercy at this point. My last arrows in your tourniquet, I say. Make it count, says Peeta, unzipping his jacket, letting me loose. So I free the arrow, tying the

tourniquet back as tightly as my frozen fingers can manage. I rub my hands together, trying to regain circulation. When I crawl to the lip of the horn and hang over the edge, I feel Peetas hands grip me for support. It takes a few moments to find Cato in the dim light, in the blood. Then the raw hunk of meat that used to be my enemy makes a sound, and I know where his mouth is. And I think the word hes trying to say is please. Pity, not vengeance, sends my arrow flying into his skull. Peeta pulls me back up, bow in hand, quiver empty. Did you get him? he whispers. The cannon fires in answer. Then we won, Katniss, he says hollowly. Hurray for us, I get out, but theres no joy of victory in my voice. A hole opens in the plain and as if on cue, the remaining mutts bound into it, disappearing as the earth closes above them. We wait, for the hovercraft to take Catos remains, for the trumpets of victory that should follow, but nothing happens. Hey! I shout into air. Whats going on? The only response is the chatter of waking birds. Maybe its the body. Maybe we have to move away from it, says Peeta. I try to remember. Do you have to distance yourself from the dead tribute


on the final kill? My brain is too muddled to be sure, but what else could be the reason for the delay? Okay. Think you could make it to the lake? I ask. Think I better try, says Peeta. We inch down to the tail of the horn and fall to the ground. If the stiffness in my limbs is this bad, how can Peeta even move? I rise first, swinging and bending my arms and legs until I think I can help him up. Somehow, we make it back to the lake. I scoop up a handful of the cold water for Peeta and bring a second to my lips. A mockingjay gives the long, low whistle, and tears of relief fill my eyes as the hovercraft appears and takes Catos body away. Now they will take us. Now we can go home. But again theres no response. What are they waiting for? says Peeta weakly. Between the loss of the tourniquet and the effort it took to get to the lake, his wound has opened up again. I dont know, I say. Whatever the holdup is, I cant watch him lose any more blood. I get up to find a stick but almost immediately come across the arrow that bounced off Catos body armor. It will do as well as the other arrow. As I stoop to pick it up, Claudius Templesmiths voice booms into the arena. Greetings to the final contestants of the Seventy-fourth Hunger Games. The earlier revision has been revoked. Closer examination of the rule book has disclosed that only one

winner may be allowed, he says. Good luck and may the odds be ever in your favor. Theres a small burst of static and then nothing more. I stare at Peeta in disbelief as the truth sinks in. They never intended to let us both live. This has all been devised by the Gamemakers to guarantee the most dramatic showdown in history. And like a fool, I bought into it. If you think about it, its not that surprising, he says softly. I watch as he painfully makes it to his feet. Then hes moving toward me, as if in slow motion, his hand is pulling the knife from his belt Before I am even aware of my actions, my bow is loaded with the arrow pointed straight at his heart. Peeta raises his eyebrows and I see the knife has already left his hand on its way to the lake where it splashes in the water. I drop my weapons and take a step back, my face burning in what can only be shame. No, he says. Do it. Peeta limps toward me and thrusts the weapons back in my hands. I cant, I say. I wont. Do it. Before they send those mutts back or something. I dont want to die like Cato, he says. Then you shoot me, I say furiously, shoving the weapons back at him. You shoot me and go home and live with it! And as I say it, I know death right here, right now would be the easier of the two. You know I cant, Peeta says, discarding the weapons. Fine, Ill go

first anyway. He leans down and rips the bandage off his leg, eliminating the final barrier between his blood and the earth. No, you cant kill yourself, I say. Im on my knees, desperately plastering the bandage back onto his wound. Katniss, he says. Its what I want. Youre not leaving me here alone, I say.

Because if he dies, Ill never go home, not really. Ill spend the rest of my life in this arena trying to think my way out. Listen, he says pulling me to my feet. We both know they have to have a victor. It can only be one of us. Please, take it. For me. And he goes on about how he loves me, what life would be without me but Ive stopped listening because his previous words are trapped in my head, thrashing desperately around. We both know they have to have a victor. Yes, they have to have a victor. Without a victor, the whole thing would blow up in the Gamemakers faces. Theyd have failed the Capitol. Might possibly even be executed, slowly and painfully while the cameras broadcast it to every screen in the country. If Peeta and I were both to die, or they thought we were . . . My fingers fumble with the pouch on my belt, freeing it. Peeta sees it and his hand clamps on my wrist. No, I wont let you. Trust me, I

whisper. He holds my gaze for a long moment then lets me go. I loosen the top of the pouch and pour a few spoonfuls of berries into his palm. Then I fill my own. On the count of three? Peeta leans down and kisses me once, very gently. The count of three, he says. We stand, our backs pressed together, our empty hands locked tight. Hold them out. I want everyone to see, he says. I spread out my fingers, and the dark berries glisten in the sun. I give Peetas hand one last squeeze as a signal, as a good-bye, and we begin counting. One. Maybe Im wrong. Two. Maybe they dont care if we both die. Three! Its too late to change my mind. I lift my hand to my mouth, taking one last look at the world. The berries have just passed my lips when the trumpets begin to blare. The frantic voice of Claudius Templesmith shouts above them. Stop! Stop! Ladies and gentlemen, I am pleased to present the victors of the Seventy-fourth Hunger Games, Katniss Everdeen and Peeta Mellark! I give you the tributes of District Twelve!

26.

I spew the berries from my mouth, wiping my tongue with the end of my shirt to make sure no juice remains. Peeta pulls me to the lake where we both flush our mouths with water and then collapse into each others arms. You didnt swallow any? I ask him. He shakes his head. You? Guess Id be dead by now if I did, I say. I can see his lips moving in reply, but I cant hear him over the roar of the crowd in the Capitol that theyre playing live over the speakers. The hovercraft materializes overhead and two ladders drop, only theres no way Im letting go of Peeta. I keep one arm around him as I help him up, and we each place a foot on the first rung of the ladder. The electric current freezes us in place, and this time Im glad because Im not really sure Peeta can hang on for the whole ride. And since my eyes were looking down, I can see that while our muscles are immobile, nothing is preventing the blood from draining out of Peetas leg. Sure enough, the minute the door closes behind us and the current stops, he slumps to the floor unconscious. My fingers are

still gripping the back of his jacket so tightly that when they take him away it tears leaving me with a fistful of black fabric. Doctors in sterile white, masked and

gloved, already prepped to operate, go into action. Peetas so pale and still on a silver table, tubes and wires springing out of him every which way, and for a moment I forget were out of the Games and I see the doctors as just one more threat, one more pack of mutts designed to kill him. Petrified, I lunge for him, but Im caught and thrust back into another room, and a glass door seals between us. I pound on the glass, screaming my head off. Everyone ignores me except for some Capitol attendant who appears behind me and offers me a beverage. I slump down on the floor, my face against the door, staring uncomprehendingly at the crystal glass in my hand. Icy cold, filled with orange juice, a straw with a frilly white collar. How wrong it looks in my bloody, filthy hand with its dirt-caked nails and scars. My mouth waters at the smell, but I place it carefully on the floor, not trusting anything so clean and pretty. Through the glass, I see the doctors working feverishly on Peeta, their brows creased in concentration. I see the flow of liquids, pumping through the tubes, watch a wall of dials and lights that mean nothing to me. Im not sure, but I think his heart stops twice. Its like being home again, when they bring in the hopelessly mangled person from the mine explosion, or the woman in her third day of labor, or the famished

child struggling against pneumonia and my mother and Prim, they wear that same look on their faces. Now is the time to run away to the woods, to hide in the trees until the patient is long gone and in another part of the Seam the hammers make the coffin. But Im held here both by the hovercraft walls and the same force that holds the loved ones of the dying. How often Ive seen them, ringed around our kitchen table and I thought, Why dont they leave? Why do they stay to watch? And now I know. Its because you have no choice. I startle when I catch someone staring at me from only a few inches away and then realize its my own face reflecting back in the glass. Wild eyes, hollow cheeks, my hair in a tangled mat. Rabid. Feral. Mad. No wonder everyone is keeping a safe distance from me. The next thing I know weve landed back on the roof of the Training Center and theyre taking Peeta but leaving me behind the door. I start hurling myself against the glass, shrieking and I think I just catch a glimpse of pink hair it must be Effie, it has to be Effie coming to my rescue when the needle jabs me from behind. When I wake, Im afraid to move at first. The entire ceiling glows with a soft yellow light allowing me to see that Im in a room containing just my bed. No doors, no windows are visible. The air smells of

something sharp and antiseptic. My right arm has several tubes that extend into the wall behind me. Im naked, but the bedclothes arc soothing against my skin. I

tentatively lift my left hand above the cover. Not only has it been scrubbed clean, the nails are filed in perfect ovals, the scars from the burns are less prominent. I touch my cheek, my lips, the puckered scar above my eyebrow, and am just running my fingers through my silken hair when I freeze. Apprehensively I ruffle the hair by my left ear. No, it wasnt an illusion. I can hear again. I try and sit up, but some sort of wide restraining band around my waist keeps me from rising more than a few inches. The physical confinement makes me panic and Im trying to pull myself up and wriggle my hips through the band when a portion of the wall slides open and in steps the redheaded Avox girl carrying a tray. The sight of her calms me and I stop trying to escape. I want to ask her a million questions, but Im afraid any familiarity would cause her harm. Obviously I am being closely monitored. She sets the tray across my thighs and presses something that raises me to a sitting position. While she adjusts my pillows, I risk one question. I say it out loud, as clearly as my rusty voice

will allow, so nothing will seem secretive. Did Peeta make it? She gives me a nod, and as she slips a spoon into my hand, I feel the pressure of friendship. I guess she did not wish me dead after all. And Peeta has made it. Of course, he did. With all their expensive equipment here. Still, I hadnt been sure until now. As the Avox leaves, the door closes noiselessly after her and I turn hungrily to the tray. A bowl of clear broth, a small serving of applesauce, and a glass of water. This is it? I think grouchily. Shouldnt my homecoming dinner be a little more spectacular? But I find its an effort to finish the spare meal before me. My stomach seems to have shrunk to the size of a chestnut, and I have to wonder how long Ive been out because I had no trouble eating a fairly sizable breakfast that last morning in the arena. Theres usually a lag of a few days between the end of the competition and the presentation of the victor so that they can put the starving, wounded, mess of a person back together again. Somewhere, Cinna and Portia will be creating our wardrobes for the public appearances. Haymitch and Effie will be arranging the banquet for our sponsors, reviewing the questions for our final interviews. Back home, District 12 is probably in chaos as they try and organize the homecoming celebrations for Peeta and me, given

that the last one was close to thirty years ago. Home! Prim and my mother! Gale! Even the thought of Prims scruffy old cat makes me smile. Soon I will be home! I want to get out of this bed. To see Peeta and Cinna, to find out more about whats been going on. And why shouldnt I? I feel fine. But as I start to work my way out of the band, I feel a cold liquid seeping into my vein from one of the tubes and almost immediately lose consciousness. This happens on and off for an indeterminate amount of time. My waking, eating, and, even though I resist the impulse

to try and escape the bed, being knocked out again. I seem to be in a strange, continual twilight. Only a few things register. The redheaded Avox girl has not returned since the feeding, my scars are disappearing, and do I imagine it? Or do I hear a mans voice yelling? Not in the Capitol accent, but in the rougher cadences of home. And I cant help having a vague, comforting feeling that someone is looking out for me. Then finally, the time arrives when I come to and theres nothing plugged into my right arm. The restraint around my middle has been removed and I am free to move about. I start to sit up but am arrested by the sight of my hands. The skins

perfection, smooth and glowing. Not only are the scars from the arena gone, but those accumulated over years of hunting have vanished without a trace. My forehead feels like satin, and when I try to find the burn on my calf, theres nothing. I slip my legs out of bed, nervous about how they will bear my weight and find them strong and steady. Lying at the foot of the bed is an outfit that makes me flinch. Its what all of us tributes wore in the arena. I stare at it as if it had teeth until I remember that, of course, this is what I will wear to greet my team. Im dressed in less than a minute and fidgeting in front of the wall where I know theres a door even if I cant see it when suddenly it slides open. I step into a wide, deserted hall that appears to have no other doors on it. But it must. And behind one of them must be Peeta. Now that Im conscious and moving, Im growing more and more anxious about him. He must be all right or the Avox girl wouldnt have said so. But I need to see him for myself. Peeta! I call out, since theres no one to ask. I hear my name in response, but its not his voice. Its a voice that provokes first irritation and then eagerness. Effie. I turn and see them all waiting in a big chamber at the end of the hall Effie, Haymitch, and Cinna. My feet take off without hesitation. Maybe a victor should show more restraint, more

superiority, especially when she knows this will be on tape, but I dont care. I run for them and surprise even myself when I launch into Haymitchs arms first. When he whispers in my ear, Nice job, sweetheart, it doesnt sound sarcastic. Effies somewhat teary and keeps patting my hair and talking about how she told everyone we were pearls. Cinna just hugs me tight and doesnt say anything. Then I notice Portia is absent and get a bad feeling. Wheres Portia? Is she with Peeta? He is all right, isnt he? I mean, hes alive? I blurt out. Hes fine. Only they want to do your reunion live on air at the ceremony, says Haymitch. Oh. Thats all, I say. The awful moment of thinking Peetas dead again passes. I guess Id want to see that myself. Go on with Cinna. He has to get you ready, says Haymitch. Its a relief to be alone with Cinna, to feel his protective arm around my shoulders as he guides me away from the cameras, down a few passages and to an elevator that leads to the

lobby of the Training Center. The hospital then is far underground, even beneath the gym where the tributes practiced tying knots and throwing spears. The windows of the lobby are darkened, and a handful of guards stand on duty. No one

else is there to see us cross to the tribute elevator. Our footsteps echo in the emptiness. And when we ride up to the twelfth floor, the faces of all the tributes who will never return flash across my mind and theres a heavy, tight place in my chest. When the elevator doors open, Venia, Flavius, and Octavia engulf me, talking so quickly and ecstatically I cant make out their words. The sentiment is clear though. They are truly thrilled to see me and Im happy to see them, too, although not like I was to see Cinna. Its more in the way one might be glad to see an affectionate trio of pets at the end of a particularly difficult day. They sweep me into the dining room and I get a real meal roast beef and peas and soft rolls although my portions are still being strictly controlled. Because when I ask for seconds, Im refused. No, no, no. They dont want it all coming back up on the stage, says Octavia, but she secretly slips me an extra roll under the table to let me know shes on my side. We go back to my room and Cinna disappears for a while as the prep team gets me ready. Oh, they did a full body polish on you, says Flavius enviously. Not a flaw left on your skin. But when I look at my naked body in the mirror, all I can see is how skinny I am. I mean, Im sure I was worse when I came out of the arena, but I can easily count my ribs. They take

care of the shower settings for me, and they go to work on my hair, nails, and makeup when Im done. They chatter so continuously that I barely have to reply, which is good, since I dont feel very talkative. Its funny, because even though theyre rattling on about the Games, its all about where they were or what they were doing or how they felt when a specific event occurred. I was still in bed! I had just had my eyebrows dyed! I swear I nearly fainted! Everything is about them, not the dying boys and girls in the arena. We dont wallow around in the Games this way in District 12. We grit our teeth and watch because we must and try to get back to business as soon as possible when theyre over. To keep from hating the prep team, I effectively tune out most of what theyre saying. Cinna comes in with what appears to be an unassuming yellow dress across his arms. Have you given up the whole girl on fire thing? I ask. You tell me, he says, and slips it over my head. I immediately notice the padding over my breasts, adding curves that hunger has stolen from my body. My hands go to my chest and I frown. I know, says Cinna before I can object. But the Gamemakers wanted to alter you surgically. Haymitch had a huge fight with them over it. This was the compromise. He stops me before I can look at my reflection.

Wait, dont forget the shoes. Venia helps me into a pair of flat leather sandals and I

turn to the mirror. I am still the girl on fire. The sheer fabric softly glows. Even the slight movement in the air sends a ripple up my body. By comparison, the chariot costume seems garish, the interview dress too contrived. In this dress, I give the illusion of wearing candlelight. What do you think? asks Cinna. I think its the best yet, I say. When I manage to pull my eyes away from the flickering fabric, Im in for something of a shock. My hairs loose, held back by a simple hairband. The makeup rounds and fills out the sharp angles of my face. A clear polish coats my nails. The sleeveless dress is gathered at my ribs, not my waist, largely eliminating any help the padding would have given my figure. The hem falls just to my knees. Without heels, you can see my true stature. I look, very simply, like a girl. A young one. Fourteen at the most. Innocent. Harmless. Yes, it is shocking that Cinna has pulled this off when you remember Ive just won the Games. This is a very calculated look. Nothing Cinna designs is arbitrary. I bite my lip trying to figure out his motivation. I thought itd be something more . . . Sophisticated-looking, I say. I thought Peeta would like this

better, he answers carefully. Peeta? No, its not about Peeta. Its about the Capitol and the Gamemakers and the audience. Although I do not yet understand Cinnas design, its a reminder the Games are not quite finished. And beneath his benign reply, I sense a warning. Of something he cant even mention in front of his own team. We take the elevator to the level where we trained. Its customary for the victor and his or her support team to rise from beneath the stage. First the prep team, followed by the escort, the stylist, the mentor, and finally the victor. Only this year, with two victors who share both an escort and a mentor, the whole thing has had to be rethought. I find myself in a poorly lit area under the stage. A brand-new metal plate has been installed to transport me upward. You can still see small piles of sawdust, smell fresh paint. Cinna and the prep team peel off to change into their own costumes and take their positions, leaving me alone. In the gloom, I see a makeshift wall about ten yards away and assume Peetas behind it. The rumbling of the crowd is loud, so I dont notice Haymitch until he touches my shoulder. I spring away, startled, still half in the arena, I guess. Easy, just me. Lets have a look at you, Haymitch says. I hold out my arms and turn once. Good enough. Its not much of a

compliment. But what? I say. Haymitchs eyes shift around my musty holding space, and he seems to make a decision. But nothing. How about a hug for luck? Okay, thats an odd request from Haymitch but, after all, we are victors. Maybe a hug for luck is in order. Only, when I put my arms around his neck, I find myself trapped in his embrace. He begins talking, very fast, very quietly in my ear, my hair concealing his lips. Listen up. Youre in trouble. Word is the Capitols furious about

you showing them up in the arena. The one thing they cant stand is being laughed at and theyre the joke of Panem, says Haymitch. I feel dread coursing through me now, but I laugh as though Haymitch is saying something completely delightful because nothing is covering my mouth. So, what? Your only defense can be you were so madly in love you werent responsible for your actions. Haymitch pulls back and adjusts my hairband. Got it, sweetheart? He could be talking about anything now. Got it, I say. Did you tell Peeta this? Dont have to, says Haymitch. Hes already there. But you think Im not? I say, taking the opportunity to straighten a bright red bow tie Cinna must have wrestled him into. Since when does it matter what I think?

says Haymitch. Better take our places. He leads me to the metal circle. This is your night, sweetheart. Enjoy it. He kisses me on the forehead and disappears into the gloom. I tug on my skirt, willing it to be longer, wanting it to cover the knocking in my knees. Then I realize its pointless. My whole bodys shaking like a leaf. Hopefully, it will be put down to excitement. After all, its my night. The damp, moldy smell beneath the stage threatens to choke me. A cold, clammy sweat breaks out on my skin and I cant rid myself of the feeling that the boards above my head are about to collapse, to bury me alive under the rubble. When I left the arena, when the trumpets played, I was supposed to be safe. From then on. For the rest of my life. But if what Haymitch says is true, and hes got no reason to lie, Ive never been in such a dangerous place in my life. Its so much worse than being hunted in the arena. There, I could only die. End of story. But out here Prim, my mother, Gale, the people of District 12, everyone I care about back home could be punished if I cant pull off the girl-driven-crazy-by-love scenario Haymitch has suggested. So I still have a chance, though. Funny, in the arena, when I poured out those berries, I was only thinking of outsmarting the Gamemakers, not how my actions would reflect on the Capitol. But

the Hunger Games are their weapon and you are not supposed to be able to defeat it. So now the Capitol will act as if theyve been in control the whole time. As if they orchestrated the whole event, right down to the double suicide. But that will only work if I play along with them. And Peeta . . . Peeta will suffer, too, if this goes wrong. But what was it Haymitch said when I asked if he had told Peeta the situation? That he had to pretend to be desperately in love? Dont have to. Hes already there. Already thinking ahead of me in the Games again and well aware of the danger were in? Or . . . Already desperately in love? I dont know. I havent even begun to separate out my feelings about Peeta. Its too complicated. What I did as part of the Games. As opposed to what I did out of anger at the Capitol. Or because of how it would be viewed back in District 12. Or simply because it was the only decent thing to do.

Or what I did because I cared about him. These are questions to be unraveled back home, in the peace and quiet of the woods, when no one is watching. Not here with every eye upon me. But I wont have that luxury for who knows how long. And right now, the most dangerous part of the Hunger Games is about to begin.

27.

The anthem booms in my ears, and then I hear Caesar Flickerman greeting the audience. Does he know how crucial it is to get every word right from now on? He must. He will want to help us. The crowd breaks into applause as the prep teams are presented. I imagine Flavius, Venia, and Octavia bouncing around and taking ridiculous, bobbing bows. Its a safe bet theyre clueless. Then Effies introduced. How long shes waited for this moment. I hope shes able to enjoy it because as misguided as Effie can be, she has a very keen instinct about certain things and must at least suspect were in trouble. Portia and Cinna receive huge cheers, of course, theyve been brilliant, had a dazzling debut. I now understand Cinnas choice of dress for me for tonight. Ill need to look as girlish and innocent as possible. Haymitchs appearance brings a round of stomping that goes on at least five minutes. Well, hes accomplished a first. Keeping not only one but two tributes alive. What if he hadnt warned me in time? Would I have acted differently? Flaunted the moment with the berries in the Capitols face? No, I dont think so. But I could easily have been a lot less convincing

than I need to be now. Right now. Because I can feel the plate lifting me up to the stage. Blinding lights. The deafening roar rattles the metal under my feet. Then theres Peeta just a few yards away. He looks so clean and healthy and beautiful, I can hardly recognize him. But his smile is the same whether in mud or in the Capitol and when I see it, I take about three steps and fling myself into his arms. He staggers back, almost losing his balance, and thats when I realize the slim, metal contraption in his hand is some kind of cane. He rights himself and we just cling to each other while the audience goes insane. Hes kissing me and all the time Im thinking, Do you know? Do you know how much danger were in? After about ten minutes of this, Caesar Flickerman taps on his shoulder to continue the show, and Peeta just pushes him aside without even glancing at him. The audience goes berserk. Whether he knows or not, Peeta is, as usual, playing the crowd exactly right. Finally, Haymitch interrupts us and gives us a good-natured shove toward the victors chair. Usually, this is a single, ornate chair from which the winning tribute watches a film of the highlights of the Games, but since there are two of us, the Gamemakers have provided a plush red velvet couch. A small one, my mother would call it a love seat, I think. I sit so close

to Peeta that Im practically on his lap, but one look from Haymitch tells me it isnt enough. Kicking off my sandals, I tuck my feet to the side and lean my head against

Peetas shoulder. His arm goes around me automatically, and I feel like Im back in the cave, curled up against him, trying to keep warm. His shirt is made of the same yellow material as my dress, but Portias put him in long black pants. No sandals, either, but a pair of sturdy black boots he keeps solidly planted on the stage. I wish Cinna had given me a similar outfit, I feel so vulnerable in this flimsy dress. But I guess that was the point. Caesar Flickerman makes a few more jokes, and then its time for the show. This will last exactly three hours and is required viewing for all of Panem. As the lights dim and the seal appears on the screen, I realize Im unprepared for this. I do not want to watch my twenty-two fellow tributes die. I saw enough of them die the first time. My heart starts pounding and I have a strong impulse to run. How have the other victors faced this alone? During the highlights, they periodically show the winners reaction up on a box in the corner of the screen. I think back to earlier years . . . Some are triumphant, pumping their fists in the air, beating their

chests. Most just seem stunned. All I know is that the only thing keeping me on this love seat is Peeta his arm around my shoulder, his other hand claimed by both of mine. Of course, the previous victors didnt have the Capitol looking for a way to destroy them. Condensing several weeks into three hours is quite a feat, especially when you consider how many cameras were going at once. Whoever puts together the highlights has to choose what sort of story to tell. This year, for the first time, they tell a love story. I know Peeta and I won, but a disproportionate amount of time is spent on us, right from the beginning. Im glad though, because it supports the whole crazy-in-love thing thats my defense for defying the Capitol, plus it means we wont have as much time to linger over the deaths. The first half hour or so focuses on the pre-arena events, the reaping, the chariot ride through the Capitol, our training scores, and our interviews. Theres this sort of upbeat soundtrack playing under it that makes it twice as awful because, of course, almost everyone on-screen is dead. Once were in the arena, theres detailed coverage of the bloodbath and then the filmmakers basically alternate between shots of tributes dying and shots of us. Mostly Peeta really, theres no question hes carrying this romance thing on his shoulders.

Now I see what the audience saw, how he misled the Careers about me, stayed awake the entire night under the tracker jacker tree, fought Cato to let me escape and even while he lay in that mud bank, whispered my name in his sleep. I seem heartless in comparison dodging fireballs, dropping nests, and blowing up supplies until I go hunting for Rue. They play her death in full, the spearing, my failed rescue attempt, my arrow through the boy from District 1s throat, Rue drawing her last breath in my arms. And the song. I get to sing every note of the song.

Something inside me shuts down and Im too numb to feel anything. Its like watching complete strangers in another Hunger Games. But I do notice they omit the part where I covered her in flowers. Right. Because even that smacks of rebellion. Things pick up for me once theyve announced two tributes from the same district can live and I shout out Peetas name and then clap my hands over my mouth. If Ive seemed indifferent to him earlier, I make up for it now, by finding him, nursing him back to health, going to the feast for the medicine, and being very free with my kisses. Objectively, I can see the mutts and Catos death are as gruesome as ever, but again, I

feel it happens to people I have never met. And then comes the moment with the berries. I can hear the audience hushing one another, not wanting to miss anything. A wave of gratitude to the filmmakers sweeps over me when they end not with the announcement of our victory, but with me pounding on the glass door of the hovercraft, screaming Peetas name as they try to revive him. In terms of survival, its my best moment all night. The anthems playing yet again and we rise as President Snow himself takes the stage followed by a little girl carrying a cushion that holds the crown. Theres just one crown, though, and you can hear the crowds confusion whose head will he place it on? until President Snow gives it a twist and it separates into two halves. He places the first around Peetas brow with a smile. Hes still smiling when he settles the second on my head, but his eyes, just inches from mine, are as unforgiving as a snakes. Thats when I know that even though both of us would have eaten the berries, I am to blame for having the idea. Im the instigator. Im the one to be punished. Much bowing and cheering follows. My arm is about to fall off from waving when Caesar Flickerman finally bids the audience good night, reminding them to tune in tomorrow for the final interviews. As if they have a choice. Peeta and I are whisked

to the presidents mansion for the Victory Banquet, where we have very little time to eat as Capitol officials and particularly generous sponsors elbow one another out of the way as they try to get their picture with us. Face after beaming face flashes by, becoming increasingly intoxicated as the evening wears on. Occasionally, I catch a glimpse of Haymitch, which is reassuring, or President Snow, which is terrifying, but I keep laughing and thanking people and smiling as my picture is taken. The one thing I never do is let go of Peetas hand. The sun is just peeking over the horizon when we straggle back to the twelfth floor of the Training Center. I think now Ill finally get a word alone with Peeta, but Haymitch sends him off with Portia to get something fitted for the interview and personally escorts me to my door. Why cant I talk to him? I ask. Plenty of time for talk when we get home, says Haymitch. Go to bed, youre on air at two. Despite Haymitchs running interference, Im

determined to see Peeta privately. After I toss and turn for a few hours, I slip into the hall. My first thought is to check the roof, but its empty. Even the city streets far below are deserted after the celebration last night. I go back to bed for a while and

then decide to go directly to his room, but when I try to turn the knob, I find my own bedroom door has been locked from the outside. I suspect Haymitch initially, but then theres a more insidious fear that the Capitol may by monitoring and confining me. Ive been unable to escape since the Hunger Games began, but this feels different, much more personal. This feels like Ive been imprisoned for a crime and Im awaiting sentencing. I quickly get back in bed and pretend to sleep until Effie Trinket comes to alert me to the start of another big, big, big day! I have about five minutes to eat a bowl of hot grain and stew before the prep team descends. All I have to say is, The crowd loved you! and its unnecessary to speak for the next couple of hours. When Cinna comes in, he shoos them out and dresses me in a white, gauzy dress and pink shoes. Then he personally adjusts my makeup until I seem to radiate a soft, rosy glow. We make idle chitchat, but Im afraid to ask him anything of real importance because after the incident with the door, I cant shake the feeling that Im being watched constantly. The interview takes place right down the hall in the sitting room. A space has been cleared and the love seat has been moved in and surrounded by vases of red and pink roses. There are only a handful of cameras to record the

event. No live audience at least. Caesar Flickerman gives me a warm hug when I. Come in. Congratulations, Katniss. How are you faring? Fine. Nervous about the interview, I say. Dont be. Were going to have a fabulous time, he says, giving my cheek a reassuring pat. Im not good at talking about myself, I say. Nothing you say will be wrong, he says. And I think, Oh, Caesar, if only that were true. But actually, President Snow may be arranging some sort of accident for me as we speak. Then Peetas there looking handsome in red and white, pulling me off to the side. I hardly get to see you. Haymitch seems bent on keeping us apart. Haymitch is actually bent on keeping us alive, but there are too many ears listening, so I just say, Yes, hes gotten very responsible lately. Well, theres just this and we go home. Then he cant watch us all the time, says Peeta. I feel a sort of shiver run through me and theres no time to analyze why, because theyre ready for us. We sit somewhat formally on the love seat, but Caesar says, Oh, go ahead and curl up next to him if you want. It looked very sweet. So I tuck my feet up and Peeta pulls me in close to him. Someone counts backward and just like that, were being broadcast live to the entire country. Caesar Flickerman is wonderful, teasing, joking, getting choked up when the occasion

presents itself. He and Peeta already have the rapport they established

that night of the first interview, that easy banter, so I just smile a lot and try to speak as little as possible. I mean, I have to talk some, but as soon as I can I redirect the conversation back to Peeta. Eventually though, Caesar begins to pose questions that insist on fuller answers. Well, Peeta, we know, from our days in the cave, that it was love at first sight for you from what, age five? Caesar says. From the moment I laid eyes on her, says Peeta. But, Katniss, what a ride for you. I think the real excitement for the audience was watching you fall for him. When did you realize you were in love with him? asks Caesar. Oh, thats a hard one . . . I give a faint, breathy laugh and look down at my hands. Help. Well, I know when it hit me. The night when you shouted out his name from that tree, says Caesar. Thank you, Caesar! I think, and then go with his idea. Yes, I guess that was it. I mean, until that point, I just tried not to think about what my feelings might be, honestly, because it was so confusing and it only made things worse if I actually cared about him. But then, in the tree, everything changed, I say. Why do you think that was? urges Caesar. Maybe . . .

Because for the first time . . . There was a chance I could keep him, I say. Behind a cameraman, I see Haymitch give a sort of huff with relief and I know Ive said the right thing. Caesar pulls out a handkerchief and has to take a moment because hes so moved. I can feel Peeta press his forehead into my temple and he asks, So now that youve got me, what are you going to do with me? I turn in to him. Put you somewhere you cant get hurt. And when he kisses me, people in the room actually sigh. For Caesar, this is a natural place to segue into all the ways we did get hurt in the arena, from burns, to stings, to wounds. But its not until we get around to the mutts that I forget Im on camera. When Caesar asks Peeta how his new leg is working out. New leg? I say, and I cant help reaching out and pulling up the bottom of Peetas pants. Oh, no, I whisper, taking in the metal-and-plastic device that has replaced his flesh. No one told you? asks Caesar gently. I shake my head. I havent had the chance, says Peeta with a slight shrug. Its my fault, I say. Because I used that tourniquet. Yes, its your fault Im alive, says Peeta. Hes right, says Caesar. Hed have bled to death for sure without it. I guess this is true, but I cant help feeling upset about it to the extent that Im afraid I might cry and then I remember everyone in the country is watching

me so I just bury my face in Peetas shirt. It takes them a couple of minutes to coax me back out because its better in the shirt, where no one can see me, and when I do come out, Caesar backs off questioning me so I can recover. In fact, he pretty much leaves me alone until the berries come up. Katniss, I know youve had a shock, but Ive got to ask. The moment when you pulled out those berries. What was going on in your mind . . . Hm? he says. I take

a long pause before I answer, trying to collect my thoughts. This is the crucial moment where I either challenged the Capitol or went so crazy at the idea of losing Peeta that I cant be held responsible for my actions. It seems to call for a big, dramatic speech, but all I get out is one almost inaudible sentence. I dont know, I just . . . Couldnt bear the thought of . . . Being without him. Peeta? Anything to add? asks Caesar. No. I think that goes for both of us, he says. Caesar signs off and its over. Everyones laughing and crying and hugging, but Im still not sure until I reach Haymitch. Okay? I whisper. Perfect, he answers. I go back to my room to collect a few things and find theres nothing to take but the mockingjay pin Madge gave me.

Someone returned it to my room after the Games. They drive us through the streets in a car with blackened windows, and the trains waiting for us. We barely have time to say good-bye to Cinna and Portia, although well see them in a few months, when we tour the districts for a round of victory ceremonies. Its the Capitols way of reminding people that the Hunger Games never really go away. Well be given a lot of useless plaques, and everyone will have to pretend they love us. The train begins moving and were plunged into night until we clear the tunnel and I take my first free breath since the reaping. Effie is accompanying us back and Haymitch, too, of course. We eat an enormous dinner and settle into silence in front of the television to watch a replay of the interview. With the Capitol growing farther away every second, I begin to think of home. Of Prim and my mother. Of Gale. I excuse myself to change out of my dress and into a plain shirt and pants. As I slowly, thoroughly wash the makeup from my face and put my hair in its braid, I begin transforming back into myself. Katniss Everdeen. A girl who lives in the Seam. Hunts in the woods. Trades in the Hob. I stare in the mirror as I try to remember who I am and who I am not. By the time I join the others, the pressure of Peetas arm around my shoulders feels alien.

When the train makes a brief stop for fuel, were allowed to go outside for some fresh air. Theres no longer any need to guard us. Peeta and I walk down along the track, hand in hand, and I cant find anything to say now that were alone. He stops to gather a bunch of wildflowers for me. When he presents them, I work hard to look pleased. Because he cant know that the pink-and-white flowers are the tops of wild onions and only remind me of the hours Ive spent gathering them with Gale. Gale. The idea of seeing Gale in a matter of hours makes my stomach churn. But why? I cant quite frame it in my mind. I only know that I feel like Ive been lying to someone who trusts me. Or more accurately, to two people. Ive been getting away with it up to this point because of the Games. But there will be no Games to hide behind back home. Whats wrong? Peeta asks. Nothing, I answer. We continue walking, past the end of

the train, out where even Im fairly sure there are no cameras hidden in the scrubby bushes along the track. Still no words come. Haymitch startles me when he lays a hand on my back. Even now, in the middle of nowhere, he keeps his voice down. Great job, you two. Just keep it up in the district until the cameras are gone.

We should be okay. I watch him head back to the train, avoiding Peetas eyes. Whats he mean? Peeta asks me. Its the Capitol. They didnt like our stunt with the berries, I blurt out. What? What are you talking about? he says. It seemed too rebellious. So, Haymitch has been coaching me through the last few days. So I didnt make it worse, I say. Coaching you? But not me, says Peeta. He knew you were smart enough to get it right, I say. I didnt know there was anything to get right, says Peeta. So, what youre saying is, these last few days and then I guess . . . Back in the arena . . . That was just some strategy you two worked out. No. I mean, I couldnt even talk to him in the arena, could I? I stammer. But you knew what he wanted you to do, didnt you? says Peeta. I bite my lip. Katniss? He drops my hand and I take a step, as if to catch my balance. It was all for the Games, Peeta says. How you acted. Not all of it, I say, tightly holding onto my flowers. Then how much? No, forget that. I guess the real question is whats going to be left when we get home? he says. I dont know. The closer we get to District Twelve, the more confused I get, I say. He waits, for further explanation, but nones forthcoming. Well, let me know when you work it out, he says, and the pain in his voice is palpable. I know my ears are healed because, even with the rumble of the engine, I can hear every step he takes back to the train. By the time Ive climbed aboard, Peeta has disappiared into his room for the night. I dont see him the next morning, either. In fact, the next time he turns up, were pulling into District 12. He gives me a nod, his face expressionless. I want to tell him that hes not being fair. That we were strangers. That I did what it took to stay alive, to keep us both alive in the arena. That I cant explain how things are with Gale because I dont know myself. That its no good loving me because Im never going to get married anyway and hed just end up hating me later instead of sooner. That if I do have feelings for him, it doesnt matter because Ill never be able to afford the kind of love that leads to a family, to children. And how can he? How can he after what weve just been through? I also want to tell him how much I already miss him. But that wouldnt be fair on my part. So we just stand there silently, watching our grimy little station rise up around us. Through the window, I can see the platforms thick with cameras. Everyone will be eagerly watching our homecoming. Out of the corner of my eye, I see Peeta extend his hand. I look at him, unsure. One more time? For the audience? he says. His voice isnt angry. Its hollow, which is worse.


Already the boy with the bread is slipping away from me. I take his hand, holding on tightly, preparing for the cameras, and dreading the moment when I will finally have to let go.

EOS






